







                           The Lamplighter

                         By MARIA S. CUMMINS

     Author of "MABEL VAUGHAN," "EL FUREIDIS," "HAUNTED HEARTS."


A. L. BURT, PUBLISHER
52-58 DUANE STREET
NEW YORK




THE LAMPLIGHTER




CHAPTER I.

LIGHT IN DARKNESS.

    "Good God! to think upon a child
      That has no childish days,
    No careless play, no frolics wild,
      No words of prayer and praise."
    --LANDON.


It was growing dark in the city. Out in the open country it would be
light for half-an-hour or more; but in the streets it was already dusk.
Upon the wooden door-step of a low-roofed, dark, and unwholesome-looking
house, sat a little girl, earnestly gazing up the street. The house-door
behind her was close to the side-walk; and the step on which she sat was
so low that her little unshod feet rested on the cold bricks. It was a
chilly evening in November, and a light fall of snow had made the narrow
streets and dark lanes dirtier and more cheerless than ever.

Many people were passing, but no one noticed the little girl, for no one
in the world cared for her. She was clad in the poorest of garments; her
hair was long, thick, and uncombed, and her complexion was sallow, and
her whole appearance was unhealthy. She had fine dark eyes; but so large
did they seem, in contrast to her thin, puny face that they increased
its peculiarity without increasing its beauty. Had she had a mother
(which, alas! she had not), those friendly eyes would have found
something in her to praise. But the poor little thing was told, a dozen
times a-day, that she was the worst-looking child in the world, and the
worst-behaved. No one loved her, and she loved no one; no one tried to
make her happy, or cared whether she was so. She was but eight years
old, and alone in the world.

She loved to watch for the coming of the old man who lit the street-lamp
in front of the house where she lived; to see his bright torch flicker
in the wind; and then when he so quickly ran up his ladder, lit the
lamp, and made the place cheerful, a gleam of joy was shed on a little
desolate heart, to which gladness was a stranger; and though he had
never seemed to see, and had never spoken to her, she felt, as she
watched for the old lamplighter, as if he were a friend.

"Gerty," exclaimed a harsh voice within, "have you been for the milk?"

The child made no answer, but gliding off the door-step, ran quickly
round the corner of the house, and hid a little out of sight. "What's
become of that child?" said the woman who spoke, and who now showed
herself at the door.

A boy who was passing, and had seen Gerty run, and who looked upon her
as a spirit of evil, laughed aloud, pointed to the corner which
concealed her, and walking off with his head over his shoulders, to see
what would happen next, said to himself, "She'll catch it!"

Gerty was dragged from her hiding-place, and with one blow for her
ugliness and another for her impudence (for she was making faces at Nan
Grant), was despatched down a neighbouring alley for the milk.

She ran fast, fearing the lamplighter would come and go in her absence,
and was rejoiced, on her return, to catch a sight of him just going up
his ladder. She stood at the foot of it, and was so engaged in watching
the bright flame, that she did not observe the descent of the man; and,
as she was directly in his way, he struck against her, and she fell upon
the pavement. "Hallo, my little one!" exclaimed he, "how's this?" as he
stooped to lift her up. She was on her feet in an instant; for she was
used to hard knocks, and did not mind a few bruises. But the milk was
all spilt.

"Well! now, I declare!" said the man, "that's too bad!--what'll mammy
say?" and looking into Gerty's face, he exclaimed, "My, what an
odd-faced child!--looks like a witch!" Then, seeing that she looked
sadly at the spilt milk, he kindly said, "She won't be hard on such a
mite as you are, will she? Cheer up, my ducky! never mind if she does
scold you a little. I'll bring you something to-morrow that you'll like;
you're such a lonely-looking thing. And if the old woman makes a row,
tell her I did it.--But didn't I hurt you? What were you doing with my
ladder?"

"I was seeing you light the lamp," said Gerty, "and I an't hurt a bit;
but I wish I hadn't spilt the milk."

Just then Nan Grant came to the door, saw what had happened, and pulled
the child into the house, amidst blows and profane, brutal language. The
lamplighter tried to appease her, but she shut the door in his face.
Gerty was scolded, beaten, deprived of her usual crust for her supper,
and shut up in her dark attic for the night. Poor little child! Her
mother had died in Nan Grant's house five years before; and she had been
tolerated there since, not so much because when Ben Grant went to sea he
bade his wife to keep the child until his return--he had been gone so
long that no one thought he would ever come back--but because Nan had
reasons of her own for doing so, and, though she considered Gerty a dead
weight upon her hands, she did not care to excite inquiries by trying to
dispose of her elsewhere.

When Gerty found herself locked up for the night in the dark
garret--Gerty hated and feared the dark--she stood for a minute
perfectly still, then suddenly began to stamp and scream, tried to beat
open the door, and shouted, "I hate you, Nan Grant! Old Nan Grant, I
hate you!" But nobody came near her; and she grew more quiet, lay down
on her miserable bed, covered her face with her little thin hands, and
sobbed as if her heart would break. She wept until she was exhausted;
and then gradually she became still. By-and-by she took her hands from
her face, clasped them together convulsively, and looked up at a little
glazed window near the bed. It was but three panes of glass unevenly
stuck together. There was no moon; but as Gerty looked up, she saw
shining upon her _one_ bright star. She thought she had never seen
anything half so beautiful. She had often been out of doors when the sky
was full of stars, and had not noticed them much; but this one, all
alone, so large, so bright, and yet so soft and pleasant-looking, seemed
to speak to her; to say, "Gerty! Gerty! _poor_ little Gerty!" She
thought it seemed like a kind face, such as she had a long time ago
seen or dreamt about. Suddenly she asked herself, "Who lit it? Somebody
lit it! Some good person, I know. Oh! how could he get up so high?" And
Gerty fell asleep, wondering who lit the star.

Poor little, untaught, benighted soul! Who shall enlighten thee? Thou
art God's child, little one! Christ died for thee. Will he not send man
or angel to light up the darkness within, to kindle a light that shall
never go out, the light that shall shine through all eternity!

Gerty awoke the next morning, not as children wake who are roused by
merry voices, or by a parent's kiss, who have kind hands to help them
dress, and knowing that a nice breakfast awaits them; but she heard
harsh voices below; Nan's son, and two or three boarders had come in to
breakfast, and Gerty's only chance of obtaining any share of the meal
was to be on the spot when they had finished, to take that portion of
what remained which Nan might shove towards her. So she crept
downstairs, waited a little till they had all gone out, and then she
slid into the room. She met with a rough greeting from Nan, who told her
she had better drop that ugly, sour look; eat some breakfast, if she
wanted it, but keep out of her way, and not come near the fire, where
she was at work, or she'd get another dressing, worse than she had last
night. Gerty had not looked for any other treatment, so she was not
disappointed; but, glad of the miserable food left for her on the table,
she swallowed it eagerly, and she took her little old hood, threw on a
ragged shawl, which had belonged to her mother, and ran out of the
house.

Back of Nan Grant's house was a large wood and coal-yard, and beyond
that a wharf, and the thick, muddy water of a dock. Gerty might have
found many playmates in this place. She sometimes did mingle with the
boys and girls, ragged like herself, who played in the yard; but not
often--there was a league against her among the children of the place.
Poor, ragged, and miserably cared for, as they were, they knew that
Gerty was more neglected and abused. They had often seen her beaten, and
daily heard her called an ugly, wicked child; told that she belonged to
nobody, and had no business in any one's house. Thus they felt their
advantage, and scorned the little outcast. Perhaps this would not have
been the case if Gerty had mingled freely with them, and tried to be on
friendly terms; but, while her mother lived, she did her best to keep
her little girl away from the rude herd. Perhaps that habit of
avoidance, but still more a something in the child's nature, kept her
from joining in their rough sports, after her mother's death had left
her to do as she liked. She seldom had any intercourse with them. Nor
did they abuse her except in words; for, singly, they dared not cope
with her--spirited, sudden, and violent, she had made herself feared as
well as disliked. Once a band of them had united to vex her; but, Nan
Grant coming up just when one of the girls was throwing the shoes, which
she had pulled from Gerty's feet, into the dock, had given the girl a
sound whipping, and put them all to flight. Gerty had not had a pair of
shoes since; but Nan Grant, for once, had done her a good service, and
the children now left her in peace.

It was a sunshiny, though a cold day, when Gerty sought shelter in the
wood-yard. There was an immense pile of timber in one corner of the
yard, almost out of sight of any of the houses. Of different lengths,
the planks formed, on one side, a series of irregular steps. Near the
top was a little sheltered recess, overhung by some long planks, and
forming a miniature shed, protected by the wood on all sides but one,
and from that looking out upon the water.

This was Gerty's haven of rest, and the only place from which she never
was expelled. Here, during the long summer days, the little lonesome
child sat brooding over her griefs, her wrongs, and her ugliness;
sometimes weeping for hours. Now and then she would get a little more
cheerful, and enjoy watching the sailors as they laboured on board their
vessels, or rowed to and fro in little boats. The warm sunshine was so
pleasant, and the men's voices so lively, that the poor little thing
sometimes forgot her woes.

But summer was gone, and the schooner and the sailors were gone too. The
weather was cold, and for a few days had been so stormy, that Gerty had
to stay in the house. Now, however, she made the best of her way to her
little hiding-place; and, to her joy, the sunshine had dried up the
boards, so that they felt warm to her bare feet, and was still shining
so bright and pleasant, that Gerty forgot Nan Grant, forgot how cold
she had been, and how much she dreaded the long winter. Her thoughts
rambled about sometime; but, at last, fixed upon the kind look and voice
of the old lamplighter; and then, for the first time since the promise
was made, it came into her mind that he had engaged to bring her
something the next time he came. She could not believe he would remember
it; but still he might--he seemed to be so sorry for her fall.

What would he bring? Would it be something to eat? Oh, if it were only
some shoes! Perhaps he did not notice that she had none?

Gerty resolved to go for her milk in season to be back before it was
time to light the lamp, so that nothing should prevent her seeing him.
The day seemed very long, but darkness came at last; and with it came
True--or rather Trueman Flint, for that was the lamplighter's name.
Gerty was on the spot, though she took good care to elude Nan Grant's
observation.

True was late about his work that night, and in a great hurry. He had
only time to speak a few words to Gerty; but they were words coming
straight from a good and honest heart. He put his great, smutty hand on
her head in the kindest way, told her how sorry he was she got hurt, and
said. "It was a plaguy shame she should have been whipped, too, and all
for a spill o' milk, that was a misfortin', and no crime."

"But here," added he, diving into one of his huge pockets, "here's the
critter I promised you. Take good care on't; don't 'buse it; and I'm
thinking, if it's like the mother I've got at home, 'twon't be a little
ye'll be likin' it, 'fore you're done. Good-bye, my little gal;" and he
shouldered his ladder and went off, leaving in Gerty's hands a little
grey-and-white kitten.

Gerty was so taken by surprise on finding in her arms a live kitten,
something so different from what she had anticipated, that she stood
irresolute what to do with it. There were a many cats, of all sizes and
colours, inhabitants of the neighbouring houses and yard;
frightened-looking creatures, which, like Gerty herself, ran about, and
hid themselves among the wood and coal, seeming to feel, as she did,
great doubts about their having a right to be anywhere. Gerty had often
felt a sympathy for them, but never thought of trying to catch one, and
carry it home; for she knew that food and shelter were grudgingly
accorded to herself, and would not be extended to her pets. Her first
thought, therefore, was to throw the kitten down, and let it run away.
But while she was hesitating, the little animal pleaded for itself in a
way she could not resist. Frightened by its long journey in True Flint's
pocket, it crept from Gerty's arms up to her neck, clung there, and,
with feeble cries, seemed to ask her to take care of it. Its eloquence
prevailed over all fear of Nan Grant's anger. She hugged pussy to her
bosom, and resolved to love and feed it, and keep it out of Nan's sight.

How much she came in time to love that kitten no words can tell. Her
little, fierce, untamed, impetuous nature had hitherto expressed itself
only in angry passion, sullen obstinacy, and hatred. But there were in
her soul fountains of warm affection, a depth of tenderness never yet
called out, and a warmth and devotion of nature that wanted only an
object upon which to expend themselves.

So she poured out such wealth of love on the poor kitten as only such a
desolate little heart has to spare. She loved the kitten all the more
for the care she was obliged to take of it, and the trouble it gave her.
She kept it, as much as possible, out among the boards, in her favourite
haunts. She found an old hat, in which she placed her hood, to make a
bed for pussy. She carried it a part of her scanty meals; she braved for
it what she would not have done for herself--for almost every day she
abstracted from the kettle, when she returned with the milk for Nan
Grant, enough for pussy's supper, at the risk of being discovered and
punished, the only risk of harm the poor ignorant child knew or thought
of, in connection with the theft; for her ideas of abstract right and
wrong were utterly undeveloped. So she would play with her kitten for
hours among the boards, talk to it, and tell it how much she loved it.
But in very cold days she was puzzled to know how to keep herself warm
out of doors, and the risk of bringing the kitten into the house was
great. She would then hide it in her bosom, and run with it into her
little garret. Once or twice, when she had been off her guard, her
little playful pet had escaped from her, and scampered through the lower
room and passage. Once Nan drove it out with a broom; but there cats and
kittens were not so uncommon as to excite inquiry.

How was it that Gerty had leisure to spend all her time at play? Most
children of the poorer class learn to be useful while they are young.
Nan Grant had no babies; and being a very active woman, with but a poor
opinion of children's services, she never tried to find employment for
Gerty, much better satisfied for her to keep out of her sight; so that,
except her daily errand for the milk, Gerty was always idle--a fruitful
source of unhappiness and discontent.

Nan was a Scotchwoman, not young, and with a temper which, never good,
became worse as she grew older. She had seen life's roughest side, and
had always been a hard-working woman. Her husband was a carpenter, but
she made his house so uncomfortable, that for years he had followed the
sea. She took in washing, and had a few boarders; by which she earned
what might have been an ample support for herself, had it not been for
her son, a disorderly young man, spoilt in early life by his mother's
management, and who, though a skilful workman, squandered his own and a
large part of his mother's earnings. Nan had reason for keeping Gerty,
though they were not so strong as to prevent her often being inclined to
get rid of the encumbrance.




CHAPTER II.

COMFORT AND AFFLICTION.

    "Mercy and love have met thee on thy road,
    Thou wretched outcast!"      --WORDSWORTH.


Gerty had had her kitten about a month, when she took a violent cold
from exposure to damp and rain; and Nan, fearing she should have trouble
with her if she became seriously ill, bade her stay in the house, and
keep in the warm room. Gerty's cough was fearful; and she would have sat
by the fire all day, had it not been for her anxiety about the kitten.
Towards night the men were heard coming in to supper. Just as they
entered the door of the room where Nan and Gerty were, one of them
stumbled over the kitten, which had slyly come in with them.

"Cracky! what's this 'ere?" said the man whom they called Jemmy; "a cat,
I vow! Why, Nan, I thought you hated cats!"

"Well, 'tan't none o' mine; drive it out," said Nan.

Jemmy tried to do so; but puss, making a circuit round his legs, sprang
forward into the arms of Gerty.

"Whose kitten's that, Gerty?" said Nan.

"Mine!" said Gerty, bravely.

"Well, how long have you kept cats?" asked Nan. "Speak! how came you by
this?"

Gerty was afraid of the men. She did not like to confess to whom she was
indebted for the kitten; she knew it would only make matters worse, for
Nan had never forgiven True Flint's rough expostulation against her
cruelty in beating the child for spilling the milk, and Gerty could not
think of any other source to which she could ascribe the kitten's
presence, or she would not have hesitated to tell a falsehood; for her
limited education had not taught her a love or habit of truth where a
lie would better serve her turn, and save her from punishment. She was
silent, and burst into tears.

"Come," said Jemmy, "give us some supper, Nan, and let the gal alone."
Nan complied, ominously muttering, however.

The supper just finished, an organ-grinder began to play at the door.
The men stepped out to join the crowd, who were watching the motions of
a monkey that danced to the music. Gerty ran to the window to look out.
Delighted with the gambols of the creature, she gazed until the man and
monkey moved off--so intently, that she did not miss the kitten which
had crept down from her arms, and, springing upon the table, began to
devour the remnants of the repast. The organ-grinder was not out of
sight when Gerty saw the old lamplighter coming up the street. She
resolved to watch him light his lamp, when she was startled by a sharp
and angry exclamation from Nan, and turned just in time to see her
snatch her darling kitten from the table. Gerty sprang to the rescue,
jumped into a chair, and caught Nan by the arm; but she firmly pushed
her back, and threw the kitten half across the room. Gerty heard a
sudden splash and a piercing cry. Nan had flung the poor creature into a
large vessel of steaming hot water. The poor animal writhed an instant,
then died in torture.

Gerty's anger was aroused. Without hesitation, she lifted a stick of
wood, and violently flung it at Nan, and it struck the woman on the
head. The blood started from the wound; but Nan hardly felt the blow, so
greatly was she excited against the child. She sprang upon her, caught
her by the shoulder, and opening the house-door, thrust her out. "Ye'll
never darken my doors again, yer imp of wickedness!" said she, leaving
the child alone in the cold night.

When Gerty was angry, she always cried aloud--uttering a succession of
piercing shrieks, until she sometimes quite exhausted her strength. When
she found herself in the street she commenced screaming--not from fear
of being turned away from her only home, and left alone at nightfall to
wander about the city, and perhaps freeze before morning--she did not
think of herself for a moment. Horror and grief at the dreadful fate of
the only thing she loved in the world entirely filled her little soul.
So she crouched down against the side of the house, her face hid in her
hands, unconscious of the noise she was making. Suddenly she found
herself placed on Trueman Flint's ladder, which leaned against the
lamp-post. True held her high enough to bring her face opposite his, and
saw his old acquaintance, and kindly asked her what was the matter.

But Gerty could only gasp and say, "Oh, my kitten! my kitten!"

"What! the kitten I gave you? Well, have you lost it? Don't cry!
there--don't cry!"

"Oh, no! not lost! Oh, poor kitty!" and Gerty cried louder and coughed
so dreadfully, that True was frightened for the child. Making every
effort to soothe her, he told her she would catch her death o' cold, and
she must go into the house.

"Oh, she won't let me in!" said Gerty "and I wouldn't go if she would."

"Who won't let you in?--your mother?"

"No! Nan Grant?"

"Who's Nan Grant?"

"She's a horrid, wicked woman, that drowned my kitten in bilin' water."

"But where's your mother?"

"I ha'n't got none."

"Who do you belong to, you poor little thing?"

"Nobody; and I've no business anywhere!"

"With whom do you live, and who takes care of you?"

"Oh, I lived with Nan Grant; but I hate her. I threw a stick of wood at
her head, and I wish I had killed her!"

"Hush! hush! you musn't say that! I'll go and speak to her."

True moved to the door, trying to draw Gerty in; but she resisted so
forcibly that he left her outside, and, walking into the room, where Nan
was binding up her head with a handkerchief, told her she had better
call her little girl in, for she would freeze to death out there.

"She's no child of mine," said Nan; "she's the worst little creature
that ever lived; it's a wonder I've kept her so long; and now I hope
I'll never lay eyes on her agin--and, what's more, I don't mean. She
ought to be hung for breaking my head! I believe she's got an ill spirit
in her!"

"But what'll become of her?" said True. "It's a fearful cold night.
How'd you feel, marm, if she were found to-morrow morning all _friz_ up
on your door-step!"

"How'd I feel! That's your business, is it? S'posen you take care on her
yourself! Yer make a mighty deal o' fuss about the brat. Carry her home,
and try how yer like her. Yer've been here a talkin' to me about her
once afore, and I won't hear a word more. Let other folks see to her, I
say; I've had more'n my share, and as to her freezin', or dyin' anyhow,
I'll risk her. Them children that comes into the world, nobody knows
how, don't go out of it in a hurry. She's the city's property--let 'em
look out for her; and you'd better go, and not meddle with what don't
consarn you."

True did not wait to hear more. He was not used to an angry woman, who
was the most formidable thing to him in the world. Nan's flashing eyes
and menacing attitude warned him of the coming tempest, and he hastened
away. Gerty had ceased crying when he came out, and looked into his face
with the greatest interest.

"Well," said he, "she says you shan't come back."

"Oh, I'm so glad!" said Gerty.

"But where'll you go to?"

"I don't know! p'raps I'll go with you, and see you light the lamps."

"But where'll you sleep to-night?"

"I don't know where; I haven't got any home. I'll sleep out where I can
see the stars. But it'll be cold, won't it?"

"My goodness! You'll freeze to death, child."

"Well, what'll become of me, then?"

"The Lord only knows!"

True looked at Gerty in perfect wonder. He could not leave her there on
such a cold night; but he hardly knew what he could do with her at home,
for he lived alone, and was poor. But another violent coughing decided
him to share with her his shelter, fire, and food, for one night, at
least. "Come," said he, "with me;" and Gerty ran along by his side,
never asking whither.

True had a dozen lamps to light before his round was finished. Gerty
watched him light each with as keen an interest as if that were the only
object for which she was in his company; and it was only after they had
walked on for some distance without stopping, that she inquired where
they were going.

"Going home," said True.

"Am I going to your home?" said Gerty.

"Yes," said True, "and here it is."

He opened a little gate leading into a small yard, which stretched along
the whole length of a two-storied house. True lived in the back part of
it; and both went in. Gerty was trembling with the cold; her little bare
feet were quite blue with walking on the pavements. There was a stove in
the room, but no fire in it. True immediately disposed of his ladder,
torch, etc., in an adjoining shed, and bringing in a handful of wood, he
lit a fire. Drawing an old wooden settle up to the fire, he threw his
great-coat over it, and lifting little Gerty up, he placed her gently
upon the seat. He then prepared supper; for True was an old bachelor,
and did everything for himself. He made tea; then, mixing a great mugful
for Gerty, with plenty of sugar and all his milk, he brought a loaf of
bread, cut her a large slice, and pressed her to eat and drink as much
as she could; for he concluded, from her looks, that she had not been
well fed; and so much pleased did he feel in her enjoyment of the best
meal she had ever had, that he forgot to partake of it himself, but sat
watching her with a tenderness which proved that he was a friend to
everybody, even to the most forlorn little girl in the world.

Trueman Flint was born in New Hampshire; but, when fifteen years old,
being left an orphan, he had made his way to Boston, where he supported
himself by whatever employment he could obtain; having been a
newspaper-carrier, a cab-driver, a porter, a wood-cutter, indeed, a
jack-at-all-trades; and so honest, capable, and good-tempered had he
always shown himself, that he everywhere won a good name, and had
sometimes continued for years in the same employ. Previous to his
entering upon the service in which we find him, he had been a porter in
a large store, owned by a wealthy and generous merchant. Being one day
engaged in removing some casks, he was severely injured by one of them
falling upon his chest. For a long time no hope was entertained of his
recovery; and when he began to mend, his health returned so gradually
that it was a year before he was able to be at work again. This sickness
swallowed up the savings of years; but his late employer never allowed
him to want for any comforts, provided an excellent physician, and saw
that he was well taken care of.

But True had never been the same man since. He rose from his sick-bed
debilitated, and apparently ten years older, and his strength so much
enfeebled, that he was only fit for some comparatively light employment.
It was then that his kind master obtained for him the situation of
lamplighter; and he frequently earned considerable sums by sawing wood,
shovelling snow, and other jobs. He was now between fifty and sixty
years old, a stoutly-built man, with features cut in one of nature's
rough moulds, but expressive of much good nature. He was naturally
reserved, lived much by himself, was little known, and had only one
crony, the sexton of a neighbouring church.

But we left Gertie finishing her supper, and now she is stretched upon
the wide settle, sound asleep, covered up with a warm blanket, and her
head resting upon a pillow. True sits beside her; her little, thin hand
lies in his great palm--occasionally he draws the blanket closer around
her. She breathes hard; suddenly she gives a nervous start, then speaks
quickly; her dreams are evidently troubled. True listens intently to her
words, as she exclaims eagerly, "Oh, don't! don't drown my kitty!" and
then, again, in a voice of fear, "Oh, she'll catch me! she'll catch me!"
once more; and now her tones are touchingly plaintive and
earnest--"Dear, dear, good old man! let me stay with you; do let me
stay!"

Tears are in Trueman Flint's eyes; he lays his great head on the pillow
and draws Gerty's little face close to his; at the same time smoothing
her long, uncombed hair with his hand. He, too, is thinking aloud--what
does _he_ say? "Catch you!--no, she _shan't_! Stay with _me_!--so you
shall, I promise you, poor little birdie! All alone in this big
world--and so am I. Please God, we'll bide together."




CHAPTER III.

THE LAW OF KINDNESS.


Little Gerty had found a friend and a protector; and it was well she
had, for neglect and suffering had well-nigh cut short her sad
existence. The morning after True took her home, she woke in a high
fever. She looked around, and found she was alone in the room; but there
was a good fire, and preparation for breakfast. For a moment or two she
was puzzled to know where she was, and what had happened to her; for the
room seemed quite strange, it now being daylight. A smile passed over
her face when she recalled the events of the previous night, and thought
of kind old True, and the new home she had found with him. She went to
the window to look out, though her head was giddy, and she could hardly
walk. The ground was covered with snow, and which dazzled Gerty's eyes,
for she suddenly found herself quite blinded--her head grew dizzy, she
staggered and fell.

Trueman came in a moment after, and was frightened at seeing Gerty
stretched upon the floor, and was not surprised that she had fainted in
trying to walk. He placed her in bed, and soon succeeded in restoring
her to consciousness; but for three weeks she never sat up, except when
True held her in his arms. True was a rough and clumsy man about most
things; but not so in the care of his little charge. He was something of
a doctor and nurse in his simple way; and, though he had never had much
to do with children, his warm heart taught him all that was necessary
for Gerty's comfort.

Gerty was patient; but would lie awake whole nights suffering from pain
and weariness through long confinement to a sick-bed, without uttering a
groan, lest she might waken True, who slept on the floor beside her,
when he could so far forget his anxiety about her as to sleep at all.
Sometimes, when in great pain, True carried her in his arms for hours;
but Gerty would try to appear relieved before she was so, and feign
sleep that he might put her to bed again and take some rest himself. Her
little heart was full of love and gratitude to her kind protector, and
she spent much time in thinking what she could do for him when she got
well. True was often obliged to leave her to attend to his work; and
during the first week she was much alone, though everything she could
possibly want was put within her reach. At last she became delirious,
and for some days had no knowledge how she was taken care of. One day,
after a long sleep, she woke restored to consciousness, and saw a woman
sitting by her bedside sewing. She sprang up in bed to look at the
stranger, who had not observed her open her eyes, but who started when
she heard her move, and exclaimed, "Oh, lie down, my child! lie down!"
laying her hand gently upon her.

"I don't know you," said Gerty; "where's my Uncle True?" for that was
the name by which True had told her to call him.

"He's gone out, dear; he'll be home soon. How do you feel--better?"

"Oh, yes! much better. Have I been asleep long?"

"Some time; lie down now, and I'll bring you some gruel--it will be good
for you."

"Does Uncle True know you are here?"

"Yes. I came in to sit with you while he was away."

"Come in?--From where?"

"From my room. I live in the other part of the house."

"I think you're very good," said Gerty. "I like you. I wonder why I did
not see you when you came in."

"You were too sick, dear, to notice; but I think you'll soon be better
now."

The woman prepared the gruel, and, after Gerty had taken it, reseated
herself at her work. Gerty laid down in bed, with her face towards her
new friend, and, fixing her large eyes upon her, watched her while she
sat sewing. At last the woman looked up, and said, "Well, what do you
think I am making?"

"I don't know," said Gerty; "what are you?"

The woman held up her work, so that Gerty could see that it was a dark
calico frock for a child.

"Oh! what a nice gown!" said Gerty. "Who it is for?--your little girl?"

"No," said the woman, "I haven't got any little girl; I've only got one
child, my boy Willie."

"Willie; that's a pretty name," said Gerty. "Is he a good boy?"

"Good? He's the best boy in the world, and the handsomest!" answered the
woman.

Gerty turned away, and a look so sad came over her countenance, that the
woman thought she was getting tired, and ought to be kept very quiet.
She told her so, and bade her to go to sleep again. Gerty lay still, and
then True came in.

"Oh, Mrs. Sullivan," said he, "you're here still! I'm very much obleeged
to you for stayin'; I hadn't calkerlated to be gone so long. And how
does the child seem to be, marm?"

"Much better, Mr. Flint. She's come to her reason, and I think, with
care, will do well now. Oh, she's awake," he added, seeing Gerty open
her eyes.

True came to the bedside, stroked back her hair, now cut short, and felt
her pulse, and nodded his head satisfactorily. Gerty caught his great
hand between both of hers, and held it tight. He sat down on the side of
the bed, and said, "I shouldn't be surprised if she needed her new
clothes sooner than we thought of, marm. It's my opinion we'll have her
up and about afore many days."

"So I was thinking," said Mrs. Sullivan; "but don't be in too great a
hurry. She's had a very severe sickness, and her recovery must be
gradual. Did you see Miss Graham to-day?"

"Yes, I did see her, poor thing! The Lord bless her sweet face! She
axed a sight o' questions about little Gerty here, and gave me this
parcel of _arrer-root_, I think she called it. She says it's excellent
in sickness. Did you ever fix any, Mrs. Sullivan, so that you can jist
show me how, if you'll be so good; for I declare I don't remember,
though she took a deal o' pains to tell me."

"Oh, yes; it's very easy. I'll come in and prepare some by-and-by. I
don't think Gerty'll want any at present; she's just had some gruel. But
father has come home, and I must be seeing about our tea. I'll come in
again this evening, Mr. Flint."

"Thank you, marm, thank you; you're very kind."

During the few following days Mrs. Sullivan came in and sat with Gerty
several times. She was a gentle woman, with a placid face, very
refreshing to a child that had long lived in fear, and suffered a great
deal of abuse. One evening, when Gerty had nearly recovered, she was
sitting in True's lap by the fire, carefully wrapped in a blanket. She
had been talking to him about her new acquaintance and friend, when
suddenly she said, "Uncle True, do you know what little girl she's
making a gown for?"

"For a little girl," said True, "that needs a frock and a many other
things; for she hasn't got any clothes, except a few old rags. Do you
know any such little girl, Gerty?"

"I guess I do," said Gerty, with a very knowing look.

"Well, where is she?"

"An't she in your lap?"

"What, you!--Why, do you think Mrs. Sullivan would spend her time making
clothes for you?"

"Well," said Gerty hanging her head, "I shouldn't _think_ she would, but
then you _said_----"

"Well, what did I say?"

"Something about new clothes for me."

"So I did," said True; "they _are_ for you--two whole suits, with shoes
and stockings."

Gerty opened her large eyes in amazement, and clapped her hands, and
True laughed too.

"Did she buy them, Uncle True? Is she rich?" asked Gerty.

"Mrs. Sullivan?--no, indeed!" said True. "Miss Graham bought 'em, and is
going to pay Mrs. Sullivan for making them."

"Who is Miss Graham?"

"She's a lady too good for this world--that's sartin. I'll tell you
about her some time; but better not now, for it's time you were abed and
asleep."

One Sabbath, after Gerty was nearly well, she was so much fatigued that
she went to bed before dark, and for three hours slept soundly. On
awaking, she saw that True had company. An old man, much older than
True, was sitting on the opposite side of the stove, smoking a pipe. His
dress, though ancient and homely, was neat; and his hair was white. He
had sharp features, and Gerty thought from his looks he could say sharp
things. She rightly conjectured that he was Mrs. Sullivan's father, Mr.
Cooper; and she did not widely differ from most other people who knew
the old church-sexton. But both his own face and public opinion somewhat
wronged him. His nature was not a genial one. Domestic trials, and the
fickleness of fortune, had caused him to look on the dark side of
life--to dwell upon its sorrows, and frown upon the bright hopes of the
young and the gay. His occupation did not counteract a disposition to
melancholy; his duties in the church were solitary, and in his old age
he had little intercourse with the world, had become severe toward its
follies, and unforgiving toward its crimes. There was much that was good
and benevolent in him, however; and True Flint knew it. True liked the
old man's sincerity; and many a Sabbath evening had they sat by that
same fireside, and discussed questions of public policy, national
institutions, and individual rights. Trueman Flint was the reverse of
Paul Cooper in disposition and temper, being very sanguine, always
disposed to look upon the bright side of things, and ever averring that
it was his opinion 'twould all come out right at last. On this evening
they had been talking on several of such topics; but when Gerty awoke
she found herself the subject of conversation.

"Where," asked Mr. Cooper, "did you say you picked her up?"

"At Nan Grant's," said True. "Don't you remember her? she's the same
woman whose son you were called up to witness against, at the time the
church-windows were broken. You can't have forgotten her at the trial,
Cooper; for she blew you up with a vengeance, and didn't spare his
honour the judge either. Well, 'twas just such a rage she was in with
this 'ere child the first time I saw her; and the _second_ time she'd
just turned her out o' doors."

"Ah, yes, I remember the she-bear. I shouldn't suppose she'd be any too
gentle to her own child, much less a stranger's; but what are you going
to do with the foundling, Flint?"

"Do with her?--Keep her, to be sure, and take care on her."

Cooper laughed rather sarcastically.

"Well, now, I s'pose, neighbour, you think it's rather freakish in me to
be adoptin' a child at my time o' life; and pr'haps it is; but I'll
explain. She'd a died that night I tell yer on, if I hadn't brought her
home with me; and many times since, what's more, if I, with the help o'
your darter, hadn't took good care on her. Well, she took on so in her
sleep, the first night ever she came, and cried out to me all as if she
never had a friend afore (and probably she never had), that I resolved
then she should stay, at any rate, and I'd take care on her, and share
my last crust with the wee thing, come what might. The Lord's been very
marciful to me, Mr. Cooper, very marciful! He's raised me up friends in
my deep distress. I knew, when I was a little shaver, what a lonesome
thing it was to be fatherless and motherless; and when I see this little
sufferin' human bein' I felt as if, all friendless as she seemed, she
was more specially the Lord's, and as if I could not sarve Him more, and
ought not to sarve Him less, than to share with her the blessings He had
bestowed on me. You look round, neighbour, as if you thought 'twan't
much to share with any one; and 'tan't much there is here, to be sure;
but it's a _home_,--yes, a _home_; and that's a great thing to her that
never had one. I've got my hands yet, and a stout heart, and a willin'
mind. With God's help, I'll be a father to the child; and the time may
come when she'll be God's embodied blessin' to me."

Mr. Cooper shook his head doubtfully, and muttered something about
children, even one's own, not being apt to prove blessings.

Trueman added, "Oh, neighbour Cooper, if I had not made up my mind the
night Gerty came here, I wouldn't have sent her away after the next day;
for the Lord, I think, spoke to me by the mouth of one of his holy
angels, and bade me persevere in my resolution. You've seen Miss
Graham. She goes to your church regular, with the fine old gentleman her
father. I was at their house shovelling snow, after the great storm
three weeks since, and she sent for me to come into the kitchen. Well
may I bless her angel face, poor thing!--if the world is dark to her she
makes it light to other folks. She cannot see heaven's sunshine outside,
but she's better off than most people, for she's got it in her, I do
believe, and when she smiles it lets the glory out, and looks like God's
rainbow in the clouds. She's done me many a kindness since I got hurt so
bad in her father's store, now five years gone; and she sent for me that
day, to ask how I did, and if there was anything I wanted that she could
speak to the master about. So I told her all about little Gerty; and, I
tell you, she and I both cried 'fore I'd done. She put some money into
my hand, and told me to get Mrs. Sullivan to make some clothes for
Gerty; more than that, she promised to help me if I got into trouble
with the care of her; and when I was going away, she said, 'I'm sure
you've done quite right, True; the Lord will bless and reward your
kindness to that poor child.'"

True was so excited that he did not notice what the Sexton had observed.
Gerty had risen from her bed and was standing beside True, her eyes
fixed upon his face, breathless with the interest she felt in his words.
She touched his shoulder; he looked round, saw her, and stretched out
his arms. She sprang into them, buried her face in his bosom, and,
bursting into tears, exclaimed, "Shall I stay with you always?"

"Yes, just as long as I live," said True, "you shall be my child."




CHAPTER IV.

FIRST STEPS TO IMPROVEMENT.


It was a stormy evening. Gerty was standing at the window, watching for
True's returning from his lamplighting. She was neatly dressed, her hair
smooth, her face and hands clean. She was now quite well--better than
for years before her sickness; a pale, slender-looking child, with eyes
and mouth disproportionately large to her other features; her look of
suffering had given place to a happy though rather grave expression. On
the wide window-sill in front of her sat a plump and venerable cat,
parent to Gerty's lost darling, and for that reason very dear to her;
she was quietly stroking its back, while the constant purring that the
old veteran kept up proved her satisfaction at the arrangement.

Suddenly a rumbling, tumbling sound was heard in the wall. The house was
old, and furnished with ample accommodation for rats. One would have
thought a chimney was falling brick by brick. But it did not alarm
Gerty; she was used to rat-inhabited walls, and accustomed to hearing
such sounds all her life, when she slept in the garret at Nan Grant's.
Not so, however, with the ancient grimalkin, who pricked up her ears,
and gave every sign of a disposition to rush into battle.

Gerty glanced round the room with an air of satisfaction; then,
clambering upon the window-sill, where she could see the lamplighter as
he entered the gate, she took the cat in her arms, smoothed her dress,
and gave a look of pride at her shoes and stockings, and strove to
become patient. But it would not do; she could not be patient; it seemed
to her that he never came so late before, and she was beginning to think
he never would come at all, when he turned into the gate. He had brought
some person with him. He did not look tall enough to be Mr. Cooper, but
she concluded it must be he, for whoever it was stopped at his door
further up the yard and went it. Impatient as Gerty had been for True's
arrival, she did not run to meet him as usual, but waited until she
heard him come in through the shed, where he was in the habit of
stopping to hang up his ladder and lantern. She then ran and hid behind
the door by which he must enter the room. She evidently had some great
surprise in store for him. The cat was more mindful of her manners, and
went to meet him, rubbing her head against his legs, which was her
customary welcome.

"Hollo, whiskers," said True, "where's my little gal?"

He shut the door behind him as he spoke, thus disclosing Gerty to view.
She sprang forward with a bound, laughed, and looked first at her own
clothes and then in True's face, to see what he would think of her
appearance.

"Well, I declare!" said he, lifting her up in his arms, and carrying her
nearer to the light; "little folks do look famous! New frock, apron,
shoes! got 'em all on! And who fixed your hair? My! you an't none too
handsome, sartain, but you do look famous nice!"

"Mrs. Sullivan dressed me all up, and brushed my hair; and _more
too_--don't you see what _else_ she has done?"

True followed Gerty's eyes as they wandered around the room. He looked
amazed to satisfy her anticipations, great as they had been. He had been
gone since morning, and things had indeed undergone a transformation.
Woman's hands had evidently been at work clearing up and setting to
rights.

Until Gerty came to live with True his home had never been subjected to
female intrusion. Living alone, and entertaining scarcely any visitors,
he tried to make himself comfortable in his own way, regardless of
appearances. In his humble apartment sweeping day came but seldom, and
spring-cleaning was unknown. The corners of the ceiling were festooned
with cob-webs; the mantle-piece had accumulated a curious medley of
things, while there was no end to the rubbish that had collected under
the grate. During Gerty's illness, a bed made up on the floor for True,
and the various articles required in her sick-room, had increased the
clutter to such an extent that one almost needed a pilot to conduct him
in safety through the apartment.

Mrs. Sullivan was the soul of neatness in her rooms, in her own dress
for simplicity, and freedom from the least speck or stain. It was to
nurse Gerty, and take care of her in True's absence, that she first
entered a room the reverse of her own; the contrast was painful to her,
and it would have been a real pleasure to clear up and put it to rights;
and she resolved as soon as Gerty got well, to exert herself in the
cause of cleanliness and order, which was, in her eyes, the cause of
virtue and happiness, so completely did she identify outward neatness
and purity with inward peace.

On the day previous to that on which the great cleaning operations took
place, Gerty was observed by Mrs. Sullivan standing in the passage near
her door, and looking wistfully in. "Come in, Gerty," said the kind
little woman; "come in and see me.--Here," added she, seeing how timid
the child felt in intruding into a strange room; "you may sit up here by
the table and see me iron. This is your little dress. I am smoothing it
out, and then your things will all be done! You'll be glad of some new
clothes, shan't you?"

"Very glad, marm," said Gerty. "Am I to take them away, and keep them
all myself?"

"Yes, indeed," said Mrs. Sullivan.

"I don't know where I'll put 'em all; there an't no place in our
room--at least, no very nice place," said Gerty, glancing at the open
drawer, in which Mrs. Sullivan was placing the little dress, adding it
to a pile of neatly-folded garments.

"Why, part of them, you know, you'll be wearing," said Mrs. Sullivan;
"and we must find some good place for the rest."

"You've got good places for things," said Gerty, looking round the room;
"this is a beautiful room."

"Why, it isn't very different from Mr. Flint's. It's just the same size,
and two front windows like his. My cupboard is the best; yours is only a
three-cornered one; but that's all the difference."

"Oh, but yours don't look a bit like ours. You haven't got any bed here,
and all the chairs stand in a row, and the table shines, and the floor
is so clean, and the stove is new, and the sun comes in so bright! I
wish our room was like this! I think ours is not half so big. Why, Uncle
True stumbled over the tongs this morning, and he said there wasn't room
to swing a cat."

"Where were the tongs?" said Mrs. Sullivan.

"About the middle of the floor, marm."

"Well, you see I don't keep things in the middle of the floor. I think
if your room were all cleaned up, and places found for everything, it
would look almost as well as mine."

"I wish it could be made as nice," said Gerty; "but what could be done
with those beds?"

"I've been thinking about that. There's that little pantry--or
bathing-room, I think it must have been when this house was new, and
rich people lived in it; that's large enough to hold a small bedstead
and a chair or two; 'twould be quite a comfortable little chamber for
you. The rubbish in it might just as well be thrown away."

"Oh, that'll be nice!" said Gerty; "then Uncle True can have his bed
back again, and I'll sleep on the floor in there."

"No," said Mrs. Sullivan; "you shan't sleep on the floor. I've got a
very good little cross-legged bedstead that my Willie slept on when he
lived at home; and I'll lend it to you, if you'll take good care of it
and of everything else that is put into your room."

"Oh, I will," said Gerty. "But can I?" added she, hesitating; "do you
think I can? I don't know how to do anything."

"You never have been taught to do anything, my child; but a girl eight
years old can do many things if she is patient and tries to learn. I
could teach you to do a great deal that would be useful, and that would
help your Uncle True very much."

"What could I do?"

"You could sweep the room every day, you could make the beds, with a
little help in turning them; you could set the table, toast the bread,
and wash the dishes. Perhaps you would not do these things so well at
first; but you would keep improving, and get to be a nice little
housekeeper."

"Oh, I wish I could do something for Uncle True!" said Gerty; "but how
could I ever begin?"

"In the first place, you must have things cleaned up for you. If I
thought Mr. Flint would like it, I'd get Kate M'Carty to come in some
day and help us; and I think we could greatly improve his home."

"Oh, I know he'd like it," said Gerty; "'twould be grand! May I help?"

"Yes, you may do what you can; but Kate'll be the best hand; she's
strong, and knows how to do cleaning very well."

"Who's she?" said Gerty.

"Kate?--She's Mrs. M'Carty's daughter in the next house. Mr. Flint does
them many a good turn--saws wood, and so on. They do most of his
washing; but they can't half pay him all the kindness he's done that
family. Kate's a clever girl; she'll be glad to come and work for him
any day. I'll ask her."

"Will she come to-morrow?"

"Perhaps she will."

"Uncle True's going to be gone all day to-morrow," said Gerty; "he's
going to get in Mr. Eustace's coal. Wouldn't it be a good time?"

"Very," said Mrs. Sullivan. "I'll try and get Kate to come to-morrow."

Kate came. The room was thoroughly cleaned and put in order. Gerty's new
clothes were delivered to her own keeping; she was neatly dressed in one
suit, the other placed in a little chest found in the pantry, and which
accommodated her small wardrobe very well.

It was the result of Mrs. Sullivan's, Kate's, and Gerty's combined
labour which astonished True on his return from his work; and the
pleasure he manifested made the day a memorable one in Gerty's life, one
to be marked in her memory as long as she lived, as being the first in
which she had known _that_ happiness--perhaps the highest earth,
affords--of feeling that she had been instrumental in giving joy to
another. Gerty had entered heart and soul into the work, when she had
been allowed. She could say with truth, "_We_ did it--Mrs. Sullivan,
Kate, and _I_." None but a loving heart like Mrs. Sullivan's would have
sympathized in the feeling which made Gerty so eager to help. But _she_
did, and allotted to her many little services, which the child felt
herself more blessed in being permitted to perform than she would have
done at almost any gift bestowed upon her. She led True about to show
him how cleverly Mrs. Sullivan had made the most of the room and the
furniture; how, by moving the bed into a recess, she had reserved the
whole square-area, and made a parlour of it. It was some time before he
could be made to believe that half of his property had not been spirited
away, so incomprehensible was it to him that so much additional space
and comfort could be acquired by a little system. But his astonishment
and Gerty's delight reached their climax when she took him into the
lumber-closet, now transformed into a snug and comfortable bed-room.

"Well, I declare! Well, I declare!" was all the old man could say. He
sat down beside the stove, now polished, and made, as Gerty declared,
new, just like Mrs. Sullivan's; warmed his hands, for they were cold
with being out in the frosty evening, and then took a general view of
his reformed domicile, and of Gerty, who was about to set the table, and
toast the bread for supper. Standing on a chair, she was taking down the
cups and saucers from among the regular rows of dishes shining in
three-cornered cupboard, being deposited on the lower shelf, where she
could reach them from the floor, a plate containing some smoothly cut
slices of bread, which the thoughtful Mrs. Sullivan had prepared for
her. True watched her motions for a minute or two, and then indulged in
a short soliloquy. "Mrs. Sullivan's a clever woman, sartain, and they've
made my old house here complete, and Gerty's getting to be like the
apple of my eye, and I'm as happy a man as----"




CHAPTER V.

WHERE IS HEAVEN?


Here True was interrupted by a sudden and unceremonious opening of the
door. "Here, Uncle True, here's your package. You forgot all about it, I
guess; and I forgot it, too, till mother saw it on the table, where I'd
laid it down. I was so taken up with just coming home, you know."

"Of course--of course!" said True. "Much obleeged to you, Willie, for
fetchin' it for me. It's brittle stuff it's made of, and most likely I
should have smashed it 'fore I got it home."

"What is it?--I've been wondering."

"Why, it's a little knick-knack I've brought home for Gerty here,
that----"

"Willie! Willie!" called Mrs. Sullivan from the opposite room, "have you
been to tea, dear?"

"No, indeed, mother; have you?"

"Why, yes; but I'll get you some."

"No, no," said True; "Stay and take tea with us, Willie; take tea here,
my boy. My little Gerty is making some famous toast, and I'll have the
tea presently."

"So I will," said Willie! "No matter about any supper for me, mother,
I'm going to have my tea here with Uncle True. Come, now, let's see
what's in the bundle; but first I want to see little Gerty; mother's
been telling me about her. Where is she? Has she got well? She's been
very sick, hasn't she?"

"Oh, yes, she's nicely now," said True. "Here, Gerty, look here. Why,
where is she?"

"There she is, hiding behind the settle," said Willie, laughing. "She
ain't afraid of me, is she?"

"Well, I didn't know as she was shy," said True; "you silly little
girl," added he, "come out here and see Willie. This is Willie
Sullivan."

"I don't want to see him," said Gerty.

"Don't want to see Willie!" said True; "why, you don't know what you're
sayin'. Willie's the best boy that ever was; I 'spect you and he'll be
great friends by-and-by."

"He won't like me," said Gerty; "I know he won't."

"Why shan't I like you?" said Willie, approaching the corner where Gerty
had hid herself. Her face was covered with her hands. "I guess I shall
like you first-rate when I see you."

He stooped down, and, taking her hands from her face and holding them in
his own, he fixed his eyes full upon her, and pleasantly said, "How are
you, cousin Gerty--how do you do?"

"I an't your cousin!" said Gerty.

"Yes, you are," said Willie; "Uncle True's your uncle, and mine too!--so
we're cousins--don't you see?--and I want to get acquainted."

Gerty could not resist Willie's good-natured words and manner. She
suffered him to draw her out of the corner towards the lighter end of
the room. As she came near the lamp, she tried to free her hands in
order to cover her face up again; but Willie would not let her, and,
attracting her attention to the unopened package, he succeeded in
diverting her thoughts from herself, and in a few minutes she was quite
at her ease.

"There, Uncle True says it's for you," said Willie; "and I can't think
what 'tis, can you?"

Gerty felt, and looked wonderingly in True's face.

"Undo it, Willie," said True.

Willie produced a knife, cut the string, took off the paper, and
disclosed one of those white plaster images, so familiar to every one,
representing the little Samuel in an attitude of devotion.

"Oh, how pretty!" exclaimed Gerty, full of delight.

"Why didn't I think?" said Willie; "I might have known what 'twas by
feeling."

"Why! did you ever see it before?" said Gerty.

"Not this same one; but I've seen lots just like it."

"Have you?" said Gerty. "I never did. I think it's the beautifullest
thing that ever was. Uncle True, did you say it was for me? Where did
you get it?"

"It was by an accident I got it. A few minutes before I met you, Willie,
I was stoppin' at the corner to light my lamp, when I saw one of those
_furrin_ boys with a sight o' these things, and some black ones too, all
set up on a board, and he was walking with 'em a-top of his head. I was
just a wonderin how he kept 'em there, when he hit the board agin my
lamp-post, and the first thing I knew, whack they all went! he'd spilt
them everyone. Lucky enough for him, there was a great bank of soft snow
close to the side-walk, and the most of 'em fell into that and wasn't
hurt. Some went on to the bricks, and were smashed. Well, I kind o'
pitied the feller; for it was late, and I thought like enough he hadn't
had much luck sellin' of 'em, to have so many left on his hands----"

"On his head, you mean," said Willie.

"Yes, Master Willie, or on the snow," said True; "any way you've a mind
to have it."

"And I know what you did, Uncle True, just as well as if I'd seen you,"
said Willie; "you set your ladder and lantern right down, and helped him
to pick 'em all up--that's just what you'd be sure to do for anybody."

"This feller, Willie, didn't wait for me to get into trouble; he made
return right off. When they were all set right, he bowed and scraped,
and touched his hat to me, as if I'd been the biggest gentleman in the
land; talkin,' too, he was, all the time, though I couldn't make out a
word of his lingo; and then he insisted on my takin' one o' the figurs.
I wasn't agoin' to take it, for I didn't want it; but I happened to
think little Gerty might like it."

"Oh, I shall like it!" said Gerty. "I shall like it better than--no, not
better, but almost _as well_ as my kitten; not _quite_ as well, because
that was alive, and this isn't; but _almost_. Oh, an't he a cunning
boy?"

True, finding that Gerty was wholly taken up with the image, walked
away and began to get the tea, leaving the two children to entertain
each other.

"You must take care and not break it, Gerty," said Willie. "We had a
Samuel once, just like it, in the shop; and I dropped it out of my hand
on to the counter, and broke it into a million pieces."

"What did you call it?" asked Gerty.

"A Samuel; they're all Samuels."

"What are _Sammles_?" inquired Gerty.

"Why, that's the name of the child they're taken for."

"What do you s'pose he's sittin' on his knee for?"

Willie laughed. "Why, don't you know?" said he.

"No," said Gerty; "what is he?"

"He's praying," said Willie.

"Is that what he's got his eyes turned up for, too?"

"Yes, of course; he looks up to heaven when he prays."

"Up to where?"

"To heaven."

Gerty looked up at the ceiling in the direction in which the eyes were
turned, then at the figure. She seemed very much dissatisfied and
puzzled.

"Why, Gerty," said Willie, "I shouldn't think you knew what praying
was."

"I don't," said Gerty; "tell me."

"Don't you ever pray--pray to God?"

"No, I don't.--Who is God? Where is God?"

Willie looked inexpressibly shocked at Gerty's ignorance, and answered
reverently, "God is in heaven, Gerty."

"I don't know where that is," said Gerty. "I believe I don't know
nothin' about it."

"I shouldn't think you did," said Willie. "I _believe_ heaven is up in
the sky; but my Sunday-school teacher says, 'Heaven is anywhere where
goodness is,' or some such thing," he said.

"Are the stars in heaven?" asked Gerty.

"They look so, don't they?" said Willie. "They're in the sky, where I
always used to think heaven was."

"I should like to go to heaven," said Gerty.

"Perhaps, if you're good, you will go some time."

"Can't any but good folks go?"

"No."

"Then I can't ever go," said Gerty, mournfully.

"Why not?" asked Willie; "an't you good."

"Oh no! I'm very bad."

"What a queer child!" said Willie. "What makes you think yourself so
very bad?"

"Oh, I _am_," said Gerty, in a very sad tone; "I'm the worst of all. I'm
the worst child in the world."

"Who told you so?"

"Everybody. Nan Grant says so, and she says everybody thinks so; I know
it too, myself."

"Is Nan Grant the cross old woman you used to live with?"

"Yes. How did you know she was cross?"

"Oh, my mother's been telling me about her. Well, I want to know if she
didn't send you to school, or teach you anything?"

Gerty shook her head.

"Why, what lots you've got to learn! What did you used to do when you
lived there?"

"Nothing."

"Never did anything; don't know anything; my gracious!"

"Yes, I do know one thing," said Gerty. "I know how to toast
bread;--your mother taught me;--she let me toast some by the fire."

As she spoke, she thought of her own neglected toast, and turned towards
the stove; but she was too late--the toast was made, the supper ready,
and True was just putting it on the table.

"Oh, Uncle True," said she, "I meant to get the tea."

"I know it," said True, "but it's no matter; you can get it to-morrow."

The tears came into Gerty's eyes; she looked very much disappointed, but
said nothing. They all sat down to supper. Willie put the Samuel in the
middle of the table for a centre ornament, and told so many funny
stories that Gerty laughed heartily, forgot that she did not make the
toast herself, forgot her sadness, and showed herself, for once, a merry
child. After tea, she sat beside Willie on the great settle, and, in her
peculiar way, gave him a description of her life at Nan Grant's, winding
up with a touching account of the death of her kitten.

The two children were in a fair way to become as good friends as True
could possibly wish. True sat on the opposite side of the stove, smoking
his pipe; his elbows on his knees, his eyes bent on the children, and
his ears drinking in all their conversation. He laughed when they
laughed; took long whiffs at his pipe when they talked quietly; ceased
smoking entirely, letting his pipe rest on his knee, and secretly wiping
away a tear, when Gerty recounted her childish griefs. He often heard it
afterwards, but never _without crying_.

After Gerty had closed her tale of sorrows, she sat for a moment without
speaking, then becoming excited, as her ungoverned and easily roused
nature dwelt upon its wrongs, she burst forth in a very different tone,
and began uttering the most bitter invectives against Nan Grant. The
child's language expressed unmitigated hatred, and even a hope of future
revenge. True looked troubled at hearing her talk so angrily. Since he
brought her home he had never witnessed such a display of temper, and
had fondly believed that she would always be as quiet and gentle as
during her illness and the few weeks subsequent to it. True's own
disposition was so amiable and forgiving, that he could not imagine that
anyone, and especially a little child, should long retain feelings of
anger and bitterness. Gerty had shown herself so mild and patient since
she had been with him, that it had never occurred to him to dread any
difficulty in the management of the child. Now, however, as he observed
her flashing eyes, and noticed the doubling of her little fist as she
menaced Nan with her future wrath, he had an undefined, half-formed
presentiment of coming trouble in the control of his little charge. For
the moment she ceased, in his eyes, to be the pet and plaything he had
hitherto considered her. He saw in her something which needed a check,
and felt himself unfit to apply it.

He _was_ totally unfit to cope with a spirit like Gerty's. It was true
he possessed over her one mighty influence--her strong affection for
him, which he could not doubt. It was that which made her so submissive
and patient in her sickness, so grateful for his care and kindness, so
anxious to do something in return. It was that love, illumined by a
higher light, which came in time to sanctify it, that gave her, while
yet a mere girl, a woman's courage, a woman's strength of heart and
self-denial. It was that which cheered the old man's latter years, and
shed joy on his dying bed.

Willie tried once or twice to stop the current of her abusive language;
but soon desisted, for she did not pay the least attention to him. He
could not help smiling at her childish wrath, nor could he resist
sympathising with her in a degree. But he was conscious that Gerty was
exhibiting a very hot temper, and began to understand what made
everybody think her so bad.

After Gerty had railed about Nan a little while, she stopped of her own
accord; though an unpleasant look remained on her countenance. It soon
passed away, however; and when, a little later in the evening, Mrs.
Sullivan appeared at the door, Gerty looked bright and happy, listened
with evident delight while True uttered warm expressions of thanks for
the labour which had been undertaken in his behalf, and, when Willie
went away with his mother, said her good night, and asked him to come
again so pleasantly, and her eyes looked so bright, that Willie said, as
soon as they were out of hearing, "She's a queer little thing, an't she,
mother? But I kind o' like her."




CHAPTER VI.

THE FIRST PRAYER.


It would have been difficult to find two children of the poorer class
whose situations in life had presented a greater contrast than those of
Gerty and Willie. Gerty was a neglected orphan; she had received little
of that care, and still less of that love, which Willie had enjoyed.
Mrs. Sullivan's husband was an intelligent country clergyman; but as he
died when Willie was a baby, leaving little property for the support of
his family, the widow and her child went home to her father. The old man
needed his daughter; for death had made sad inroads in his household
since she left it, and he was alone.

From that time the three had lived together in humble comfort, for,
though poor, industry and frugality secured them from want. Willie was
his mother's pride, her hope, her constant thought. She spared no care
to provide for his physical comfort, his happiness, and his education
and virtue.

She might well be proud of a boy whose uncommon beauty, winning
disposition, and early evidences of a noble nature, won him friends even
among strangers. It was his broad, open forehead, the clearness and
calmness of his full grey eye, the expressive mouth, so determined and
yet so mild, the well-developed figure and ruddy complexion, proclaiming
high health, which gave promise of power to the future man. No one could
have been in the boy's company half an hour without loving and admiring
him. He had a warm-hearted, affectionate disposition, which his mother's
love and the world's smiles had fostered; an unusual flow of animal
spirits, tempered by a natural politeness towards his superiors; a quick
apprehension; a ready command of language; and a sincere sympathy in
others' pleasures and pains. He was fond of study, and until his twelfth
year his mother kept him constantly at school.

At that time he had an opportunity to enter into the service of an
apothecary, who did an extensive business, and wanted a boy to assist in
the shop. The wages offered by Mr. Bray were not great, but there was a
prospect of an increased salary; and it was not a chance to be
overlooked. Fond as he was of his books, he had long been eager to be at
work, helping to bear the burden of labour in the family. His mother and
grandfather consented to the plan, and he gladly accepted Mr. Bray's
proposals. He was sadly missed at home; for, as he slept at his
employer's during the week, he rarely could make a passing visit to his
mother, except on Saturday, when he came home at night and passed
Sunday. So Saturday night was Mrs. Sullivan's happy night, and the
Sabbath became a more blessed day than ever.

When Willie reached his mother's room on the evening of which we have
been speaking, he sat down with her and Mr. Cooper, and for an hour
conversation was brisk with them. Willie had always much to relate
concerning the occurrences of the week. Mrs. Sullivan was interested in
everything that interested Willie, and it was easy to see that the old
grandfather was more entertained by the boy than he was willing to
appear; for though he sat with his eyes upon the floor, and did not seem
to listen, he usually heard all that was said. He seldom made comments,
but would occasionally utter an impatient or contemptuous expression
regarding individuals or the world in general; thereby evidencing want
of confidence in men's honesty and virtue, and this formed a marked
trait in his character. Willie's spirits would receive a momentary
check, for _he_ loved and trusted _everybody_. Willie did not fear his
grandfather, who had never been severe to him, or interfered with Mrs.
Sullivan's management; but he sometimes felt chilled, though he hardly
knew why, by his want of sympathy with his own warm-heartedness. On the
present occasion the conversation turned upon True Flint and his adopted
child. Mr. Cooper had been unusually bitter, and, as he took his lamp to
go to bed, declared that Gerty would never be anything but a trouble to
Flint, who was a fool not to send her to the almshouse at once.

There was a pause after the old man left the room; then Willie
exclaimed, "Mother, what makes grandfather hate folks?"

"Why, he don't, Willie."

"I don't mean exactly _hate_--I don't suppose he does _that, quite_; but
he don't seem to think a great deal of anybody--do you think he does?"

"Oh yes; he does not show it much," said Mrs. Sullivan, "but he thinks a
great deal of you, Willie, and he wouldn't have anything happen to me
for the world; and he likes Mr. Flint, and----"

"Oh yes; but I don't mean that; he doesn't think there's much goodness
in folks, nor to think anybody's going to turn out well, and----"

"You're thinking of what he said about little Gerty."

"Well, she an't the only one. That's what made me speak of it now, but
I've often noticed it before, particularly since I went away from home,
and am only here once a week. Now I think everything of Mr. Bray; and
when I was telling how much good he did, and how kind he was to old Mrs.
Morris and her sick daughter, grandfather looked just as if he didn't
believe it, or didn't think much of it."

"Oh, well, Willie, you mustn't wonder much at that. Grandpa's had many
disappointments. You know he thought everything of Uncle Richard, and
there was no end to the trouble he had with him; and there was Aunt
Sarah's husband--he seemed to be such a fine fellow when Sally married
him, but he cheated father at last, so that he had to mortgage his house
in High Street, and finally gave it up entirely. He's dead now, and I
don't want to say anything against him; but he didn't prove what we
expected, and it broke Sally's heart. That was a dreadful trial to
father, for she was the youngest, and his pet. And just after that,
mother was taken down with her death-stroke, and a quack doctor
prescribed for her, and father always thought that did her more hurt
than good. So that he has had a great deal to make him look on the dark
side now, but you mustn't mind it, Willie; you must take care and turn
out well yourself, my son, and then he'll be proud enough; he's as
pleased as he can be when he hears you praised, and expects great things
of you one of these days."

Here the conversation ended; but Willie added another to his many
resolves, that, if his health and strength were spared, he would prove
to his grandfather that hopes were not always deceitful, and that fears
were sometimes groundless.

Oh, what a glorious thing it is for a youth when he has ever present
with him a high, a noble, and unselfish motive! What an incentive to
exertion, perseverance, and self-denial! Fears that would otherwise
appal, discouragements that would dishearten, labours that would weary,
opposition that would crush, temptation that would overcome, all, all
lie powerless, when, with a single-hearted and worthy aim, he struggles
for the victory! Persons born in wealth and luxury seldom achieve
greatness. They were not born for labour; and, without labour, nothing
that is worth having can be won. A motive Willie had long had. His
grandfather was old, his mother weak, and both poor. He must be the
staff of their old age; must labour for their support and comfort; he
must do _more_:--they hoped great things of him; they _must_ not be
disappointed. He did not, however, while arming himself for future
conflict with the world, forget the present, but sat down and learned
his Sunday-school lessons. After which, according to custom, he read
aloud in the Bible; and then Mrs. Sullivan, laying her hand on the head
of her son, offered up a simple, heart-felt prayer for the boy--one of
those mother's prayers which the child listens to with reverence and
love, and remembers for life.

After Willie went home that evening, and Gerty was left alone with True,
she sat beside him for some time without speaking. Her eyes were
intently fixed upon the white image which lay in her lap. True was not
the first to speak; but finding Gerty unusually quiet, he looked
inquiringly in her face, and said--"Well, Willie's a pretty clever sort
of a boy, isn't he?"

Gerty answered "Yes" without, however, seeming to know what she was
saying.

"You like him, don't you?" said True.

"Very much," said Gerty, in the same absent way. It was not Willie she
was thinking of. True waited for Gerty to talk about her new
acquaintance; but she did not speak for a minute or two. Then looking up
suddenly, she said--"Uncle True, what does Samuel pray to God for?"

True stared. "Samuel!--pray!--I guess I don't know exactly what you're
saying."

"Why," said Gerty, holding up the image, "Willie says this little boy's
name is Samuel; and that he sits on his knees, and puts his hands on his
breast _so_, and looks up, because he's praying to God, that lives up in
the sky. I don't know what he means--_way_ up in the sky--do you?"

True took the image and looked at it attentively; scratched his head,
and said--"Well, I s'pose he's about right. This 'ere child is prayin',
sartain, though I didn't think on it afore. But I don't jist know what
he calls it a Samuel for. We'll ask him sometime."

"Well, what does he pray for, Uncle True?"

"Oh, he prays to make him good: it makes folks good to pray to God."

"Can God make folks good?"

"Yes. God is very great; He can do anything."

"How can He _hear_?"

"He hears and sees everything in the world."

"And does He live in the sky?"

"Yes," said True--"in heaven."

Many more questions Gerty asked, which True could not answer; many
questions that he had never asked himself. True had a humble, loving
heart, and a child-like faith; he had enjoyed but little religious
instruction, but he earnestly tried to live up to the light he had. True
had never inquired into the sources of belief, and he was not prepared
to answer the questions suggested by the inquisitive mind of little
Gerty. He answered her as well as he could, however; and, where he was
at fault, referred her to Willie, who, he told her, went to
Sunday-school, and knew a great deal about such things. All the
information that Gerty could gain amounted to the knowledge of these
facts: that God was in heaven; that His power was great; and that people
were made better by prayer. But her mind was so intent upon the subject,
that the thought even of sleeping in her new room could not efface it.
After she had gone to bed, with the white image hugged close to her
bosom, and True had taken away the lamp, she lay for a long time with
her eyes wide open. Just at the foot of the bed was the window. The sky
was bright with stars; and they revived her old wonder and curiosity as
to the Author of such distant and brilliant lights. As she gazed, there
darted through her mind the thought, "God lit them! Oh, how great He
must be! But a _child_ might pray to Him!" She rose from her little bed,
approached the window, and, falling on her knees and clasping her hands
precisely in the attitude of Samuel, she looked up to heaven. She spoke
no word, but her eyes glistened with a tear that stood in each. Was not
each tear a prayer? She breathed no petition, but she longed for God and
virtue. Was not that very wish a prayer? Her little, uplifted heart
throbbed vehemently. Was not each throb a prayer? And did not God in
heaven, without whom not a sparrow falls to the ground, hear and accept
that first homage of a little, untaught child; and did it not call a
blessing down?




CHAPTER VII.

TREASURED WRONGS.

    "Revenge, at first though sweet,
    Bitter ere long back on itself recoils."--MILTON.


The next day was Sunday. True generally went to church half the day at
least, with the sexton's family; but Gerty having no bonnet could not
go, and True would not leave her. So they spent the morning wandering
round among the wharves and looking at the ships, Gerty wearing her old
shawl over her head.

Willie came in the evening to say good-bye before returning to Mr.
Bray's. He was in a hurry, for his master had his doors closed early,
especially on a Sunday night. But Mr. Cooper made his usual visit; and
when he had gone, True, finding Gerty sound asleep on the settle,
thought it a pity to wake her, and laid her in bed with her clothes on.

She did not wake until morning; and then, surprised and amused at
finding herself dressed, ran out to ask True how it happened. True was
making the fire; and Gerty having been told all about it, helped to get
the breakfast ready, and to put the room in order. She followed Mrs.
Sullivan's instructions, and in a few weeks she learned to make herself
useful in many ways, and, as Mrs. Sullivan had prophesied, gave promise
of becoming a clever little housekeeper. Her active and willing feet
saved True many steps, and she was of essential aid in keeping the rooms
neat, that being her especial ambition. Mrs. Sullivan looked in
occasionally, to praise and assist her; and nothing made Gerty happier
than learning how to do some new thing. She met with a few trials and
discouragements, to be sure. Kate M'Carty thought her the smartest child
in the world, and would oft come in and wash the floor, or do some other
work which required more strength than Gerty possessed.

One Sunday Gerty, who had a nice little hood, bought by True, was
returning with Mr. Cooper, Mr. Flint, and Willie, from the afternoon
service at church. The two old men were engaged in discussion, and the
children talked earnestly about the church, the minister, the people,
and the music, all of which were new to Gerty, and greatly excited her
wonder.

As they drew near home, Willie remarked how dark it was growing in the
streets; and then, looking down at Gerty, whom he held by the hand, he
said, "Gerty, do you ever go out with Uncle True, and see him light the
lamps?"

"No, I never did," said Gerty, "since the first night I came. I've
wanted, but it's been so cold, he would not let me; he said I'd have the
fever again."

"It won't be cold this evening," said Willie; "it'll be a beautiful
night; and, if Uncle True's willing, we will go with him. I've often
been; you can look into the windows and see folks drinking tea, and
sitting round the fire in their parlours."

"And I like to see him light those great lamps," said Gerty; "they make
it look so bright and beautiful all around. I hope he'll let us go; I'll
ask him; come," said she, pulling him by the hand.

"No--wait," said Willie; "he's busy talking with grandpa--we can ask him
at home."

As soon as they reached the gate she broke away from him, and, rushing
up to True, made known her request. He readily consented, and the three
soon started on the rounds.

For a time Gerty's attention was so engrossed by the lamplighting that
she could see and enjoy nothing else. But when they reached the corner
of the street, and came in sight of a large apothecary's shop, her
delight knew no bounds. The brilliant colours displayed in the windows
captivated her fancy; and when Willie told her that his master's shop
was similar she thought it must be a fine place to spend one's life in.
Then she wondered why this was open on Sunday, when all the other stores
were closed, and Willie, stopping to explain, they found that True was
some distance in advance. He hurried Gerty along, telling her that they
were now in the finest street they should pass through, and they must
haste, for they had nearly reached the house he most wanted her to see.
When they came up with True, he was placing his ladder against a post
opposite a fine block of buildings. Many of the front windows were
shaded, so that the children could not see in; but some had no curtains,
or they had not yet been drawn. In one parlour there was a pleasant
wood-fire, around which a group were gathered; and here Gerty would fain
have lingered. In another, a brilliant chandelier was lit, and though
the room was vacant, the furniture was so showy, and the whole so
brilliant, that the child clapped her hands in delight, and Willie could
not prevail upon her to leave the spot, until he told her that farther
down the street was another house, equally attractive, where she would
perhaps see some beautiful children.

"How do you know there'll be children there?" said she, as they walked
along.

"I don't know, certainly," said Willie; "but I think there will. They
used always to be up at the window when I came with Uncle True, last
winter."

"How many?" asked Gerty.

"Three, I believe; there was one little girl with such beautiful curls,
and such a sweet, cunning little face. She looked like a wax doll, only
a great deal prettier."

"Oh, I hope we shall see her!" said Gerty, dancing along on the tops of
her toes.

"There they are!" exclaimed Willie; "all three, I declare, just as they
used to be!"

"Where?" said Gerty; "where?"

"Over opposite, in the great stone house. Here, let's cross over. It's
muddy; I'll carry you."

Willie lifted Gerty carefully over the mud, and they stood in front of
the house. True had not yet come up. It was he that the children were
watching for. Gerty was not the only child that loved to see the lamps
lit.

It was now quite dark, so that persons in a light room could not see any
one out of doors; but Willie and Gerty had so much better chance to look
in. The mansion was a fine one, evidently the home of wealth. A clear
coal fire, and a bright lamp in the centre of the room, shed abroad
their cheerful blaze. Rich carpets, deeply-tinted curtains, pictures in
gilded frames, and huge mirrors, reflecting the whole on every side,
gave Gerty her first impressions of luxurious life. There was an air of
comfort combined with all this elegance, which made it still more
fascinating to the child of poverty and want. A table was bountifully
spread for tea; the cloth of snow-white damask, the shining plate, above
all, the home-like hissing tea-kettle, had a most inviting look. A
gentleman in gay slippers was in an easy chair by the fire; a lady in a
gay cap was superintending a servant-girl's arrangements at the
tea-table; and the children of the household, smiling and happy, were
crowded together on a window-seat, looking out, as we have just
narrated.

They were sweet, lovely-looking little creatures; especially a girl, of
the same age as Gerty, the eldest of the three. Her fair hair fell in
long ringlets over a neck as white as snow; she had blue eyes, a cherub
face, and a little round plump figure. Gerty's admiration and rapture
were such, that she could find no expression for them, and directing
Willie's notice first to one thing and then another; "Oh, Willie, isn't
she a darling? and see what a beautiful fire--what a splendid lady! What
is that on the table? I guess it's good! There's a big looking-glass;
and oh, Willie! an't they dear, handsome children?"

True now came up, and as his torch-light swept along the side-walk Gerty
and Willie became the subjects of notice and conversation. The
curly-haired girl saw them, and pointed them out to the notice of the
other two. Though Gerty could not know what they were saying, she did
not like being stared at and talked about; and hiding behind the post,
she would not move or look up, though Willie laughed at her, and told
her it was now her _turn_ to be looked at. When True moved off, she
began to run, so as to escape observation; but Willie calling to her,
and saying that the children were gone from the window, she ran back to
have one more look, and was just in time to see them taking their places
at the tea-table. Then the servant-girl drew down the window-blinds.
Gerty then took Willie's hand, and they tried to overtake True.

"Shouldn't you like to live in such a house as that, Gerty!" said
Willie.

"Yes, indeed," said Gerty; "an't it splendid?"

"I wish I had just such a house," said Willie. "I mean one of these
days."

"Where will you get it?" exclaimed Gerty, much amazed at so bold a
declaration.

"Oh, I shall work, and grow rich, and buy it."

"You can't; it would take a lot o' money!"

"I know it; but I can earn a lot, and I will, too. The gentleman that
lives in that grand house was a poor boy when he first came to Boston;
and why can't one poor boy get rich as well an another?"

"How do you suppose he got so much money?"

"I don't know how _he_ did; there are a great many ways. Some people
think it's all luck, but I guess it's as much smartness as anything."

"Are you smart?"

Willie laughed. "An't I?" said he. "If I don't turn out a rich man one
of these days, you may say I an't."

"I know what I'd do if I was rich," said Gerty.

"What?" asked Willie.

"First, I'd buy a great nice chair for Uncle True, with cushions all in
the inside, and bright flowers on it--just exactly like that one the
gentleman was sitting in; and next, I'd have great big lamps, ever so
many all in a bunch, so as to make the room as _light_--as _light_ as it
could be!"

"Seems to me you're mighty fond of lights, Gerty," said Willie.

"I be," said the child. "I hate old, dark, black places; I like stars,
and sunshine, and fires, and Uncle True's torch----"

"And I like bright eyes!" interrupted Willie; "yours look just like
stars, they shine so to-night. An't we having a good time?"

"Yes, real."

And so they went on--Gerty dancing along the side-walk, Willie sharing
in her gaiety and joy, and glorying in the responsibility of
entertaining and protecting the wild little creature. They talked of how
they would spend that future wealth which they both calculated upon one
day possessing; for Gerty had caught Willie's spirit, and she, too,
meant to work and grow rich. Willie said his mother was to wear a gay
cap, like that of the lady they had seen; this made Gerty laugh. She
thought that demure little widow would be ridiculous in a flowered
headgear. Good taste is inborn, and Gerty had it in her. She felt that
Mrs. Sullivan, attired in anything that was not simple, neat, and
sober-looking, would altogether lose her identity. Willie had no selfish
schemes; the generous boy suggested nothing for his own gratification;
it was for the rest he meant to labor, and in and through them that he
looked for his reward. Happy children! What do they want of wealth? What
of anything, material or tangible, more than they now possess? They have
what is worth more than riches or fame--they are full of childhood's
faith and hope. With a fancy and imagination unchecked by
disappointment, they are building those same castles that so many
thousand children have built before, that children will always be
building to the end of time. Far off in the distance they see bright
things, and know not what myths they are. Undeceive not the little
believers, ye wise ones! Check not that God-given hopefulness, which
will, perhaps, in its airy flight, lift them in safety over many a rough
spot in life's road. It lasts not long at the best; then check it not,
for as it dies out the way grows hard.

They had reached the last lamp-post in the street, but scarcely had they
gone a dozen steps before Gerty stopped short, and, positively refusing
to proceed any further, pulled hard at Willie's hand, and tried to
induce him to retrace his steps.

"What's the matter, Gerty?" said he, "are you tired?"

"No, oh no! but I can't go any further."

"Why not?"

"Oh, because--because--" and here Gerty putting her mouth close to
Willie's ear, whispered, "there is Nan Grant's; I see the house! I had
forgot Uncle True went there; and I am afraid!"

"Oho!" said Willie, drawing himself up with dignity, "I should like to
know what you're afraid of, when I'm with you! Let her touch you if she
dares! And Uncle True, too!--I _should_ laugh."

Very kindly did Willie plead with the child, telling her that Nan would
not be likely to see _them_, but they might see _her_; and that was just
what he wanted--nothing he should like better. Gerty's fears were soon
allayed. When they stood in front of the house, Gerty was rather hoping
than otherwise to catch sight of Nan. Nan was standing opposite the
window, engaged in an animated dispute with one of her neighbours. Her
countenance expressed great anger, and her face was now so sufficient an
index to her character, that no one could see her thus and afterwards
question her right to the title of vixen, virago, or scold.

"Which is she?" said Willie; "the tall one, swinging the coffee-pot in
her hand? I guess she'll break the handle off, if she don't look out."

"Yes," said Gerty, "that's Nan."

"What's she doing?"

"Oh, she's fighting with Mrs. Birch; she does always with somebody. She
don't see us, does she?"

"No, she's too busy. Come, don't let's stop; she's an ugly-looking
woman, just as I knew she was. I've seen enough of her, and I'm sure you
have--come."

Gerty lingered. Courageous in the knowledge that she was safe and
unseen, she was gazing at Nan, and her eyes glistened, not with the
innocent excitement of a cheerful heart, but with the fire of kindled
passion--a fire that Nan had kindled long ago, which had not yet gone
out, and which the sight of Nan had now revived in full force. Willie,
thinking it was time to be at home, and perceiving Mr. Flint and his
torch far down the street, left Gerty, and started himself, to draw her
on, saying, "Come, Gerty, I can't wait."

Gerty turned, saw that he was going, then, quick as lightning, stooped,
and picking up a stone, flung it at the window. There was a crash of
broken glass, and an exclamation in Nan's well-known voice; but Gerty
was not there to see the result. The instant she heard the crash her
fears returned, and flying past Willie, she paused not until she was
safe by the side of True.

Willie did not overtake them until they were nearly home, and then came
running up, exclaiming, breathlessly, "Why, Gerty, do you know what you
did?--You broke the window!"

Gerty jerked her shoulders from side to side to avoid Willie, pouted,
and declared that was what she meant to do.

True inquired what window? and Gerty acknowledged what she had done, and
avowed that she did it on purpose. True and Willie were shocked and
silent. Gerty was silent too, for the rest of the walk; there were
clouds on her face, and she felt unhappy in her little heart.

Willie bade them good night at the house door, and as usual they saw no
more of him for a week.




CHAPTER VIII.

A NEW FRIEND.


"Father," said Mrs. Sullivan, one afternoon, as he was preparing to take
a number of articles which he wanted for his Saturday's work in the
church, "why don't you get little Gerty to go with you, and carry some
of your things? You can't take them all at once; and she'd like to go, I
know."

"She'd only be in the way," said Mr. Cooper; "I can take them myself."

But when he had swung a lantern and an empty coal hod on one arm, taken
a little hatchet and a basket of chips in his hand, and hoisted a small
ladder over his shoulder, he was fain to acknowledge that there was no
accommodation for his hammer and a large paper of nails. Mrs. Sullivan
called Gerty, and asked her to go and help him carry his tools. Gerty
was pleased with the proposal, and started off with great alacrity.

When they reached the church the old sexton took them from her hands,
and telling her she could play about until he went home, but to be sure
and do no mischief, he went into the vestry to commence sweeping,
dusting, and building fires. Gerty had ample amusement for some time, to
wander round among the empty aisles and pews, and examine closely what,
hitherto, she had only viewed from a corner of the gallery. Then she
ascended the pulpit, and in imagination addressed a large audience. She
was growing weary and restless, however, when the organist, who had
entered unseen, commenced playing some low, sweet music; and Gerty,
seating herself on the pulpit stairs, listened with the greatest
pleasure. He had not played long before the door opened and two visitors
entered. One was an elderly man, dressed like a clergyman, with hair
thin and grey, and features rather sharp; but remarkable for his
benignant expression of countenance. A young lady, apparently about
twenty-five years of age, was leaning on his arm. She was attired with
great simplicity, wearing a dark brown cloak, and a bonnet of the same
colour, relieved by some light-blue ribbon about the face. She was
somewhat below the middle size, but had a good figure. Her features were
small and regular; her complexion clear but pale; and her light-brown
hair was neatly arranged. She never lifted her eyes as she walked slowly
up the aisle.

The two approached the spot where Gerty sat, but without perceiving her.
"I am glad you like the organ," said the gentleman; "I am not much of a
judge of music, but they say it is a superior instrument, and that
Hermann plays it remarkably well."

"Nor is my opinion of any value," said the lady; "for I have little
knowledge of music, much as I love it. But that symphony sounds very
delightful to me; it is a long time since I have heard such touching
strains; or, it may be partly owing to their striking so sweetly on the
solemn quiet of the church this afternoon. I love to go into a large
church on a week-day. It was very kind of you to call for me this
afternoon. How came you to think of it?"

"I thought you would enjoy it, my dear. I knew Hermann would be playing
about this time; and, besides, when I saw how pale you were looking I
knew the walk would do you good."

"It has done me good. I was not feeling well, and the clear, cold air
was just what I needed; I knew it would refresh me; but Mrs. Ellis was
busy, and I could not go out alone."

"I thought I should find the sexton here," said the gentleman. "I want
to speak to him about the light; the afternoons are so short now, and it
is dark so early, I must ask him to open more of the blinds, or I cannot
see to read my sermon to-morrow. He may be in the vestry-room; he is
always about here on Saturday; I will go and look for him."

Just then Mr. Cooper entered the church, and, seeing the clergyman, came
up, and after receiving his directions about the light, requested him to
go with him somewhere, for the gentleman hesitated, glanced at the young
lady, and then said, "I suppose I ought to go to-day; and, as you say
you are at leisure, it is a pity I should not; but I don't know----"

Then, turning to the lady, he said, "Emily, Mr. Cooper wants me to go to
Mrs. Glass's with him; and I shall be absent some time. Should you mind
waiting here until I return? She lives in the next street; but I may be
detained, for it's about the library-books being so mischievously
defaced, and I am afraid that her oldest boy had something to do with
it. It ought to be inquired into before to-morrow."

"Oh, go, by all means," said Emily; "don't mind me; it will be a
pleasure to sit here and listen to the music. Mr. Hermann's playing is a
great treat to me, and I don't care how long I wait; so do not hurry on
my account, Mr. Arnold."

Thus assured, Mr. Arnold led the lady to a chair beneath the pulpit, and
went with Mr. Cooper.

All this time Gerty had been unnoticed, and had remained very quiet on
the upper stair, secured from sight by the pulpit. Hardly had the doors
closed, however, with a loud bang, when the child got up, and began to
descend the stairs. The moment she moved, the lady, whose seat was very
near, started, and exclaimed, "Who's that?"

Gerty stood still, and made no reply. Strange the lady did not look up,
though she must have perceived that the movement was above her head.
There was a moment's pause, and then Gerty began again to run down the
stairs. The lady sprang up, and, stretching out her hand, said, "Who is
it?"

"Me," said Gerty, looking up in the lady's face; "it's only me."

"Will you stop and speak to me?" said the lady.

Gerty not only stopped, but came close up to Emily's chair, irresistibly
attracted by the sweetest voice she had ever heard. The lady placed her
hand on Gerty's head, and said, "Who are you?"

"Gerty."

"Gerty who?"

"Nothing else but Gerty."

"Have you forgotten your other name?"

"I haven't got any other name."

"How came you here?"

"I came with Mr. Cooper, to help him to bring his things."

"And he's left you here to wait for him, and I'm left too; so we must
take care of each other, mustn't we?"

Gerty laughed at this.

"Where were you?--On the stairs?"

"Yes."

"Suppose you sit down on this step by my chair, and talk with me a
little while: I want to see if we can't find out what your other name
is. Where do you say you live?"

"With Uncle True."

"True?"

"Yes. Mr. True Flint I live with now. He took me home to his house one
night, when Nan Grant put me out on the side-walk."

"Why, are you that little girl? Then I've heard of you before. Mr. Flint
told me all about you."

"Do you know my Uncle True?"

"Yes, very well."

"What's your name?"

"My name is Emily Graham."

"O! I know," said Gerty, springing suddenly up, and clapping her hands
together; "I know. You asked him to keep me; he said so--I _heard_ him
say so; and you gave me my clothes; and you're beautiful; and you're
good; and I love you! O! I love you ever so much!"

As Gerty spoke with a voice full of excitement, a strange look passed
over Miss Graham's face, a most inquiring and restless look, as if the
tones of the voice had vibrated on a chord of her memory. She did not
speak, but, passing her arm around the child's waist, drew her closer to
her. As the peculiar expression passed from her face, and her features
assumed their usual calmness, Gerty, as she gazed at her with a look of
wonder, exclaimed, "Are you going to sleep?"

"No.--Why?"

"Because your eyes are shut."

"They are always shut, my child."

"Always shut!--What for?"

"I am blind, Gerty; I can see nothing."

"Not see!" said Gerty; "can't you see anything? Can't you see me now?"

"No," said Miss Graham.

"O!" exclaimed Gerty, drawing a long breath, "_I'm so glad_."

"_Glad!_" said Miss Graham, in the saddest voice that ever was heard.

"O yes!" said Gerty, "so glad you can't see me!--because now, perhaps,
you'll love me."

"And shouldn't I love you if I saw you?" said Emily, passing her hand
softly and slowly over the child's features.

"Oh, no!" answered Gerty, "I'm so ugly! I'm glad you can't see how ugly
I am."

"But just think, Gerty," said Emily, in the same sad voice, "how would
you feel if you could not see the light, could not see anything in the
world?"

"Can't you see the sun, and the stars, and the sky, and the church we're
in? Are you in the dark?"

"In the dark all the time--day and night in the dark."

Gerty burst into a paroxysm of tears. "Oh!" exclaimed she, as soon as
she could find voice amid her sobs, "It's too bad! it's too bad!"

The child's grief was contagious; and, for the first time for years,
Emily wept bitterly for her blindness.

It was but for a few moments, however. Quickly recovering herself, she
tried to compose the child also, saying, "Hush! hush! don't cry; and
don't say it's too bad! It's not too bad; I can bear it very well. I'm
used to it, and am quite happy."

"I shouldn't be happy in the dark; I should _hate_ to be!" said Gerty.
"I _an't_ glad you're blind; I'm really _sorry_. I wish you could see me
and everything. Can't your eyes be opened, any way?"

"No," said Emily; "never; but we won't talk about that any more; we will
talk about you. I want to know what makes you think yourself so very
ugly."

"Because folks say that I am an ugly child, and that nobody loves ugly
children."

"Yes, people do," said Emily, "love ugly children, if they are good."

"But I an't good," said Gerty, "I'm really bad!"

"But you _can be good_," said Emily, "and then everybody will love you."

"Do you think I can be good?"

"Yes, if you try."

"I will try."

"I _hope_ you will," said Emily. "Mr. Flint thinks a great deal of his
little girl, and she must do all she can to please him."

She then asked concerning Gerty's former way of life, and became so
interested in the recital of the little girl's early sorrows and trials,
that she was unconscious of the flight of time, and quite unobservant of
the departure of the organist, who had ceased playing, closed his
instrument, and gone away.

Gerty was very communicative. The sweet voice and sympathetic tones of
Emily went straight to her heart, and though her whole life had been
passed among the poorer and lowest classes of people, she felt no awe
and constraint on her encountering, for the first time, a lady of
polished mind and manners. On the contrary, Gerty clung to Emily as
affectionately, and stroked her soft boa with as much freedom, as if she
had herself been born in a palace. Once or twice she took Emily's
nicely-gloved hand between both her own, and held it tight; her
favourite mode of expressing her warmth of gratitude and admiration.
The excitable but interesting child took no less strong a hold upon Miss
Graham's feelings. The latter perceived how neglected the little one had
been, and the importance of her being educated, lest early abuse, acting
upon an impetuous disposition, should prove destructive to a nature
capable of the best attainments. The two were still entertaining each
other, when Mr. Arnold entered the church hastily. As he came up the
aisle, he called to Emily, saying, "Emily; dear, I fear you thought I
had forgotten you. I have been longer than I intended. Were you not
tired of waiting?"

"I thought it was but a very little while. I have had company, you see."

"What, little folks," said Mr. Arnold, good-naturedly. "Where did this
little body come from?"

"She came to the church this afternoon with Mr. Cooper. Isn't he here
for her?"

"Cooper?--No: he went straight home after he left me; he's probably
forgotten all about the child. What's to be done?"

"Can't we take her home? Is it far?"

"It is two or three streets from here, and directly out of our way;
altogether too far for you to walk."

"Oh, no, it won't tire me; I'm quite strong now, and I would know she
was safe home."

If Emily could but have seen Gerty's grateful face that moment, she
would indeed have felt repaid for almost any amount of weariness.




CHAPTER IX.

MENTAL DARKNESS.


The blind girl did not forget little Gerty. Emily Graham never forgot
the sufferings, the wants, the necessities of others. She could not see
the world without, but there was a world of love and sympathy within
her, which manifested itself in abundant charity, both of heart and
deed. She loved God with her whole heart, and her neighbour as herself.
Her own great misfortunes and trials were borne without repining; but
the misfortunes and trials of others became her care, the alleviation of
them her greatest delight. Emily was never weary of doing good. But
never had she been so affected as now by any tale of sorrow. Children
were born into the world amid poverty and privation. She could not
account to herself for the interest she felt in the little stranger; but
the impulse to know more of her was irresistible, and sending for True,
she talked a long time with him about the child.

True was highly gratified by Miss Graham's account of the meeting in the
church, and of the interest the little girl had inspired in one for whom
he felt the greatest admiration and respect. Gerty had previously told
him how she had seen Miss Graham, and had spoken in the most glowing
terms of the dear lady who was so kind to her, and brought her home when
Mr. Cooper had forgotten her, but it had not occurred to the old man
that the fancy was mutual.

Emily asked him if he didn't intend to send her to school?

"Well, I don't know," said he; "she's a little thing, and an't much used
to being with other children. Besides, I don't exactly like to spare
her."

Emily suggested that it was time she was learning to read and write; and
that the sooner she went among other children, the easier it would be to
her.

"Very true, Miss Emily, very true," said Mr. Flint. "I dare say you're
right; and if you think she'd better go, I'll ask her, and see what she
says."

"I would," said Emily. "I think she might enjoy it, besides improving
very much; and, about her clothes, if there's any deficiency, I'll----"

"Oh, no, no, Miss Emily!" interrupted True; "there's no necessity; she's
very well on't now, thanks to your kindness."

"Well," said Emily, "if she should have any wants, you must apply to me.
You know we adopted her jointly, and I agreed to do anything I could for
her; so you must never hesitate--it will be a pleasure to serve either
of you. My father always feels under obligations to you, Mr. Flint, for
faithful service that cost you dear in the end."

"Oh, Miss Emily," said True, "Mr. Graham has always been my best friend;
and as to that 'ere accident that happened when I was in his employ, it
was nobody's fault but my own; it was my own carelessness, and nobody's
else."

"I know you say so," said Emily, "but we regretted it very much; and you
mustn't forget what I tell you, that I shall delight in doing anything
for Gerty. I should like to have her come and see me, some day, if she
would like, and you'll let her."

"Sartain, sartain," said True, "and thank you kindly; she'd be glad to
come."

A few days after Gerty went with True to see Miss Graham, but the
housekeeper, whom they met in the hall, told them that she was ill and
could see no one. So they went away full of disappointment and regret.

Emily had taken a severe cold the day she sat so long in the church, and
was suffering with it when they called; but, though confined to her
room, she would have been glad to have a visit from Gerty, and was sorry
that Mrs. Ellis should have sent them away.

On Saturday evening, when Willie was present, True broached the subject
of Gerty's going to school. Gerty was much displeased with the idea; but
it met with Willie's approbation; and when Gerty learned that Miss
Graham also wished it, she consented, though reluctantly, to begin the
next week, and try how she liked it. So next Monday Gerty went with True
to one of the primary schools, was admitted, and her education began.
When Willie came home the next Sunday, he rushed into True's room, eager
to hear how Gerty liked going to school. She was seated at the table,
with her spelling-book; and she exclaimed, "Oh, Willie! Willie! come and
hear me read!"

Her performance could hardly be called reading. She had not got beyond
the alphabet, and a few syllables she had learned to spell; but Willie
bestowed upon her much well-merited praise, she had been very diligent.
He was astonished to hear that Gerty liked going to school, liked the
teachers and the scholars, and had a fine time at recess. He had fully
expected that she would dislike the whole business, and go into tantrums
about it--which was the expression he used to denote her fits of
ill-temper. Willie promised to assist her in her studies; and the two
children's literary plans soon became as high-flown as if one had been a
poet-laureate and the other a philosopher.

For two or three weeks all appeared to go on smoothly. Gerty went
regularly to school, and made rapid progress. Every Saturday Willie
heard her read and spell, assisted, praised, and encouraged her. But he
had heard that, on two occasions, she had nearly had a brush with some
large girls, for whom she began to show symptoms of dislike. This soon
reached a crisis. One day, when the children were in the school-yard,
during recess, Gerty saw True in his working-dress, passing down the
street, with his ladder and lamp-filler. Shouting and laughing, she
pursued and overtook him. She came back in a few minutes, seeming much
delighted, and ran into the yard full of happy excitement. The troop of
large girls, whom Gerty had already had some reason to distrust, had
been observing her, and one of them called out saying----

"Who's that man?"

"That's my Uncle True," said Gerty.

"Your what?"

"My Uncle, Mr. Flint, that I live with."

"So you belong to him, do you?" said the girl, in an insolent tone of
voice. "Ha! ha! ha!"

"What are you laughing at?" said Gerty, fiercely.

"Ugh! Before I'd live with him!" said the girl--"Old Smutty!"

The others caught it up, and the laugh and epithet Old Smutty circulated
freely in the corner of the yard where Gerty was standing. Gerty was
furious. Her eyes glistened, she doubled her little fist, and, without
hesitation, came down in battle upon the crowd. But they were too many
for her, and, helpless as she was with passion, they drove her out of
the yard. She started for home on a full run, screaming with all her
might.

As she flew along the side-walk, she brushed stiffly against a tall,
stiff-looking lady, who was walking slowly in the same direction, with a
much smaller person leaning on her arm. "Bless me!" said the tall lady,
who had almost lost her equilibrium from the suddenness of the shock.
"Why, you horrid little creature!" As she spoke, she grasped Gerty by
the shoulder, and, before she could break away, gave her a slight shake.
This served to increase Gerty's anger, and, her speed gaining in
proportion, it was but a few minutes before she was crouched in a corner
of True's room behind the bed, her face to the wall, and covered with
both her hands. Here she was free to cry as loud as she pleased; for
Mrs. Sullivan was gone out, and there was no one in the house to hear
her.

But she had not indulged long in her tantrum when the gate at the end of
the yard closed with a bang, and footsteps were heard coming towards Mr.
Flint's door. Gerty's attention was arrested, for she knew by the sound
that a stranger was approaching. With a strong effort she controlled
herself so as to keep quiet. There was a knock at the door, but Gerty
did not reply to it, remaining concealed behind the bed. The knock was
not repeated, but the stranger lifted the latch and walked in.

"There doesn't seem to be any one at home," said a female voice, "what a
pity."

"Isn't there? I'm sorry," replied another, in the sweet musical tones of
Miss Graham. Gerty knew the voice at once.

"I thought you'd better not come here yourself," rejoined the first
speaker, who was no other than Mrs. Ellis, the identical lady whom Gerty
had so frightened and disconcerted.

"Oh, I don't regret coming," said Emily. "You can leave me here while
you go to your sister's, and very likely Mr. Flint or the little girl
will come home in the meantime."

"It don't become you, Miss Emily, to be carried round everywhere, and
left, like an express parcel, till called for. You caught a horrid cold
that you're hardly well of now, waiting there in the church for the
minister; and Mr. Graham will be finding fault next."

"Oh, no, Mrs. Ellis; it's very comfortable here; the church must have
been damp, I think. Come, put me in Mr. Flint's arm-chair, and I can
make myself quite contented."

"Well, at any rate," said Mrs. Ellis, "I'll make up a good fire in this
stove before I go."

As she spoke, the energetic housekeeper seized the poker, and, after
stirring up the coals, and making free with all True's kindlewood,
waited till the fire burnt up, and then, having laid aside Emily's
cloak, went away with the same firm step with which she had come, and
which had so overpowered Emily's noiseless tread, that Gerty had only
anticipated the arrival of a single guest. As soon as Gerty knew that
Mrs. Ellis had really departed, she suspended her efforts at
self-control, and, with a deep-drawn sigh, gasped out, "O dear! O dear!"

"Why, Gerty!" exclaimed Emily, "is that you?"

"Yes," sobbed Gerty.

"Come here."

The child waited no second bidding, but, starting up, ran, threw herself
on the floor by the side of Emily, buried her face in the blind girl's
lap, and once more commenced crying aloud. Her whole frame was agitated.

"Why, Gerty," said Emily, "what is the matter?"

But Gerty could not reply; and Emily desisted from her inquiries until
the little one should be somewhat composed. She lifted Gerty up into her
lap, laid her head upon her shoulder, and with her handkerchief wiped
the tears from her face. Her soothing words and caresses soon quieted
the child, and when she was calm, Emily, instead of recurring at once to
the cause of her grief, questioned her upon other topics. At last,
however, she asked her if she went to school.

"I _have been_," said Gerty, raising her head from Emily's shoulder;
"but I won't ever go again!"

"What!--Why not!"

"Because," said Gerty, angrily, "I hate those girls; yes, I hate 'em!
ugly things!"

"Gerty," said Emily, "don't say that; you shouldn't hate anybody."

"Why shouldn't I?" said Gerty.

"Because it's wrong."

"No, it's not _wrong_; I say it _isn't_!" said Gerty; "and I do hate
'em; and I hate Nan Grant, and I always shall! Don't _you_ hate
anybody?"

"No," answered Emily, "_I don't._"

"Did anybody ever drown your kitten? Did anybody ever call your father
Old Smutty?" said Gerty. "If they had, I know you'd hate 'em just as I
do."

"Gerty," said Emily, solemnly, "didn't you tell me, the other day, that
you were a naughty child, but that you wished to be good, and would
try!"

"Yes," said Gerty.

"If you wish to become good and be forgiven, you must forgive others."
Gerty said nothing.

"Do you not wish God to forgive and love you?"

"God, who lives in heaven--who made the stars?" said Gerty.

"Yes."

"Will he love me, and let me some time go to heaven?"

"Yes, if you try to be good and love everybody."

"Miss Emily," said Gerty, after a moment's pause, "I can't do it, so I
s'pose I can't go."

Just at this moment a tear fell upon Gerty's forehead. She looked
thoughtfully up into Emily's face, then said--

"Dear Miss Emily, are you going there?"

"I am trying."

"I should like to go with you," said Gerty.

Still Emily did not speak. She left the child to the working of her own
thoughts.

"Miss Emily," said Gerty, at last, in the lowest whisper, "I mean to
_try_, but I don't think I _can_."

"God bless you, and help you, my child!" said Emily, laying her hand
upon Gerty's head.

For fifteen minutes or more not a word was spoken by either. Gerty lay
perfectly still in Emily's lap. By-and-by the latter perceived, by the
child's breathing, that, worn out with the fever and excitement of all
she had gone through, she had dropped into a quiet sleep. When Mrs.
Ellis returned, Emily pointed to the sleeping child, and asked her to
place her on the bed. She did so, and turning to Emily, exclaimed, "My
word, Miss Emily, that's the same rude, bawling little creature that
came so near being the death of us!" Emily smiled at the idea of a child
eight years old overthrowing a woman of Mrs. Ellis' inches, but said
nothing.

Why did Emily weep long that night, as she recalled the scene of the
morning? Why did she, on bended knees, wrestle so vehemently with a
mighty sorrow? Why did she pray so earnestly for new strength and
heavenly aid? Why did she so beseechingly ask of God His blessing on the
little child? Because she had felt, in many a year of darkness and
bereavement, in many an hour of fearful struggle, in many a pang of
despair, how a temper like that of Gerty's might, in one moment of its
fearful reign, cast a blight upon a lifetime, and write in fearful lines
the mournful requiem of early joy. And so she prayed to heaven for
strength to keep her firm resolve, and aid in fulfilling her undying
purpose, to cure that child of her dark infirmity.




CHAPTER X.

AN EARTHLY MESSENGER OF PEACE.


The next Sabbath afternoon found Gerty seated on a stool in Emily's
room. Her large eyes were fixed on Emily's face, which always seemed to
fascinate the little girl; so attentively did she watch her features,
the charm of which many an older person than Gerty had felt, but could
not describe. It was not beauty; though once her face was illumined by
beautiful hazel eyes: nor was it fascination of manner, for Emily's
manner and voice were so soft and unassuming that they never took the
fancy by storm. It was not compassion for her blindness, though that
might well excite sympathy. But it was hard to realise that Emily was
blind. It was a fact never forced upon her friend's recollection by any
repining or selfish indulgence on the part of the sufferer; and, as
there was nothing painful in the appearance of her closed lids, shaded
and fringed as they were by her long eyelashes, it was not unusual for
persons to converse upon things which could only be evident to the sense
of sight, and even direct her attention to one object and another, quite
forgetting, for the moment, her sad deprivation: and Emily never sighed,
never seemed hurt at their want of consideration, or showed any lack of
interest in objects thus shut from her gaze, but quite satisfied with
the pictures which she formed in her imagination, would talk pleasantly
upon whatever was uppermost in the minds of her companions. Some said
that Emily had the sweetest mouth in the world, and they loved to watch
its ever varying expression. But true Christians knew the source whence
she derived that power by which her face and voice stole into the hearts
of young and old, and won their love--_they_ would have said the
same as Gerty did, when she sat gazing so earnestly at Emily on the
very Sunday afternoon of which we speak, "Miss Emily, I know you've been
with God."

Gerty was a strange child; but she had felt Emily's superiority to any
being she had ever seen; and she reposed confidence in what she told
her, allowed herself to be guided by one whom she felt loved her and
sought her good; and, as she sat at her feet, and listened to her gentle
voice while she gave her first lesson upon the distinction between right
and wrong, Emily, though she could not see the little thoughtful face,
knew, by her earnest attention, and by the little hand which had sought
hers, and held it tight, that one great point was won.

Gerty had not been to school since the day of her battle with the girls.
True's persuasions had failed; she would not go. But Emily understood
the child's nature better than True did, and urged upon her more
forcible motives than the old man had thought of employing, that _she_
succeeded where _he_ had failed. Gerty considered that her old friend
had been insulted, and that was the chief cause of her indignation with
her schoolmates; but Emily placed the matter in a different light, and
convincing her at last that, if she loved Uncle True, she would show it
much better by obeying his wishes than by retaining her foolish anger,
she finally obtained Gerty's promise that she would go to school the
next morning.

The next morning True, much pleased, went with her, and inquiring for
the teacher, stated the case to her in his blunt, honest way, and then
left Gerty in her special charge. Miss Browne, who was a young woman of
good sense and good feelings, saw the matter in the right light; and
taking an opportunity to speak privately to the girls who had excited
Gerty's temper by their rudeness, made them so ashamed of their conduct,
that they ceased to molest the child.

The winter passed away, and spring days came, when Gerty could sit at
the open window, when birds sang in the morning among the trees, and the
sun at evening threw bright rays across True's great room, and Gerty
could see to read almost until bed-time. She had been to school steadily
all winter, and had improved rapidly. She was healthy and well; her
clothes were clean and neat, for her wardrobe was well stocked by Emily,
and the care of it superintended by Mrs. Sullivan. She was bright and
happy too, and tripped round the house so joyously, that True declared
his birdie knew not what it was to touch her heel to the ground, but
flew about on the tips of her toes.

The old man could not have loved her better had she been his own child;
and he sat by her side on the wide settle, which, in warm weather, was
moved outside the door, and listened patiently and attentively while she
read various pleasing stories. The old man's interest in the story-books
was as keen as if he had been a child himself.

Emily, who gave these books, knew their influence on the hearts of
children, and most judiciously did she select them. Gerty's life was now
as happy as it had been wretched and miserable. All the days in the week
were joyous; but Saturday and Sunday were marked days; for Saturday
brought Willie home to hear her recite her lessons, walk, laugh, and
play with her. He had so many pleasant things to tell, was so full of
life, so ready to enter into all her plans, and promote her amusement,
that on Monday morning she began to count the days until Saturday would
come again.

Sunday afternoon Gerty always spent with Emily, listening to her sweet
voice, and imbibing a portion of her sweet spirit. Emily preached no
sermons, nor did she weary the child with precepts. It did not occur to
Gerty that she went there to be _taught_ anything; but gradually the
blind girl imparted light to the child's dark soul, and the lessons that
are divine were implanted in her so naturally, that she realized not the
work that was going on, but long after--when goodness had grown strong
within her, and her first feeble resistance of evil, her first attempts
to keep her childish resolves, had matured into deeply-rooted
principles--she felt, as she looked back, that on those blessed
Sabbaths, sitting at Emily's knee, she had received into her heart the
first beams of that immortal light that never could be quenched.

It was a grievous trial to Gerty to learn that the Graham's were about
to go into the country for the summer. Mr. Graham had a pleasant
residence about six miles from Boston, to which he resorted as soon as
the planting season commenced; for though devoted to business during the
winter, he had of late years allowed himself much relaxation during the
summer; and ledgers and day-books were to be supplanted by the delights
of gardening. Emily promised Gerty that she should pass a day with her
when the weather was fine; a visit which Gerty enjoyed three months in
anticipation, and more than three in retrospection.

It was some compensation for Emily's absence that, as the days got long,
Willie was often able to leave the shop and come home for an hour or two
in the evening; and Willie's visits always tended to comfort Gerty.




CHAPTER XI.

PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE.


It was one pleasant evening in April that Gerty, who had been to see
Miss Graham and bid her good-bye, before her departure for the country,
stood at the back part of the yard, weeping bitterly. She held in her
hand a book and a new slate, Emily's parting gifts; but she had not
removed the wrapper from the one, and the other was bedewed with tears.
She was so full of grief that she did not hear any one approach, until a
hand was placed upon each of her shoulders; and, as she turned round,
she found herself encircled by Willie's arms, and face to face with
Willie's sunny countenance. "Why, Gerty!" said he, "this is no welcome,
when I've come home on a week-night to stay with you all the evening.
Mother and grandfather are gone out, and when I come to look for you,
you're crying so I can't see your face for tears. Come, come! _do_ leave
off; you don't know how you look!"

"Willie!", sobbed she, "do you know Miss Emily's gone?"

"Gone where?"

"Way off, six miles, to stay all summer!"

But Willie only laughed. "Six miles!" said he; "that's a terrible way,
certainly!"

"But I can't see her any more!" said Gerty.

"You can see her next winter," rejoined Willie.

"Oh, but that's so long!" said the child.

"What makes you think so much of her?"

"She thinks much of me; she can't see me, and she likes me better than
anybody, but Uncle True."

"I don't believe it; I don't believe she likes you half as well as I do.
I _know_ she don't! How can she, when she's blind, and never saw you in
her life, and I see you all the time, and love you better than I do
anybody in the world, except my mother."

"Do you _really_, Willie?"

"Yes, I do. I always think, when I come home--Now I'm going to see
Gerty; and everything that happens all the week, I think to myself--I
shall tell Gerty that."

"I shouldn't think you'd like me so well."

"Why not?"

"Oh, because you're so handsome, and I an't handsome a bit. I heard
Ellen Chase tell Lucretia Davis, the other day, that she thought Gerty
Flint was the worst-looking girl in the school."

"Then she ought to be ashamed of herself," said Willie, "I guess she
an't very good-looking. I should hate the looks of _her_ or any _other_
girl that said that."

"Oh, Willie!" exclaimed Gerty, "it's true."

"No, it an't _true_," said Willie. "To be sure, you haven't got long
curls, and a round face, and blue eyes, like Belle Clinton's, and
nobody'd think of setting you up for a beauty; but when you've been
running, and have rosy cheeks, and your great black eyes shine, and you
laugh so heartily, I often think you're the brightest-looking girl I
ever saw in my life: and I don't care what other folks think, as long as
I like your looks. I feel just as bad when you cry, or anything's the
matter with you, as if it were myself, and worse."

Such professions of affection by Willie were frequent, and always
responded to by a like declaration from Gerty. Nor were they mere
professions. The two children loved each other dearly. That they loved
_each other_ there could be no doubt; and if in the spring the bond
between them was already strong, autumn found it cemented by still
firmer ties; for, during Emily's absence, Willie filled her place, and
his own too; and though Gerty did not forget her blind friend, she
passed a most happy summer, and made such progress in her studies at
school that, when Emily returned in October, she could hardly understand
how so much had been accomplished in so short a time.

